THE

I.
saddled upon her by her husband, she could not exclude him from the
with Mazarin!"
triumphantly, warming up at the sound of her own voice. "Amid the

the subtle arguments with which Lenet was accustomed to combat her
simply without repugnance, but with enthusiasm, this plan, which seems
Madame de Tourville assumed a martial air. Lenet bowed even lower than
object of Madame la Princesse is, before all else, to gain admission
bullets, the more intelligent ones even more perhaps than the brutal,

"It is very strange that you should be so bent upon demolishing what
"Monsieur," cried Madame de Tourville, impetuously, catching Lenets
holding a child by each hand, pale-cheeked, eyes red with tears and

"Especially," said Madame de Cambes, "as black is so wondrously
of any sort.
the gates closed the night before, to prevent the entrance of the
replied. Plowers fell in showers from the windows, and were stretched
a condition of frenzied adoration for the lovely child who wept so
said, hustled and crowded by the adoring people, inundated with flowers
"How so?"
to induce the Bordelais to call for our two dukes and their army, who,
"Very well! I ask leave to carry the flag of truce."
"But promise me one thing."
"To-morrow let it be."

"I have in my pocket another means of bringing them hither."
At two oclock in the afternoon, the hour appointed for the beginning
"Who is it?" the young men asked, exchanging glances.
fountain-head of favors."
merit."
"Pray, do we dine without ladies?" asked another.
now until they have sounded him on political questions; so that, he
"Ah!" said Canolles; "its very kind of him."
Richon looked proudly about upon the guests, and as he detected no
well-known gallantry, his spotless reputation, and the noble spirit

"The person who put me where I am can count upon my devotion," said
the Turenne regiment, and I was in a quandary how I was to do it, when


tranquil manner.

"Oh! as to the latter," said Canolles, "I dont consider them very
The conversation had reached this stage and the dessert had just been

over whose features a cloud had passed, still seemed restless, and kept


give me your hand, and good luck to you!"



"What is he?"
trembling, but with an affectionate smile upon her lips, made her
"Impossible. It is one of the customs which must be followed."



"What is it?"



his hat and threw back his cloak; immediately a mass of blond locks


here,--so that I should still know nothing as to who is governor of Île
arm, "be frank with me, baron, for you must realize the importance of
ties which I thought broken forever have been formed anew; for the

thoughts on the subject."
livres--"

"Go on," murmured Canolles; "but you are very cruel."
from the bottom of your heart? Why, I pray to know, will you not do
to begin, for I knew, and I said beforehand, that you would refuse the
pure and honorable recompense; if your resignation were to be
heaven during the scene we have been describing,--Canolles remained
person was present at the interview; her frightened eyes followed
understand what duty it is that you refuse to abandon or betray; I
At the words the young man started and came to himself.
hand, and said, in so low a tone that he himself could hardly hear the
IV.

you as I love you? They offered you promotion? Look you, you are to
never suffer injury, never submit to insult. Set your mind at ease on

he questioned them; they feared that this last might be the mask of
pickaxes, Canolless mind wandered away from the material things which
confessed to himself that it was duty alone which impelled him to act
motionless shadow lying beneath a lantern, she saw the living phantom
few earnest, heartfelt words, and returned to his apartment once more,

Lenet hastened to make known the good news to the princess, who at once

herself in the guise of a flag of truce at Île Saint-Georges, as

"Thats all."
his lips, kissed it ardently, and placed it upon his heart.



for he has enlisted the services of the Navailles regiment for this
"Indeed?"
"Nobody."
should believe that we are entirely unprepared for them? These men, who

"for it wont be long before you are re-enforced. The king is coming,
certain spot; if you have to take to the water, four of my people who
not leave it. If I knew that you were outside, exposed to the slightest


"Well, tell them again."
the Navailles regiment, to which, as we know, he formerly belonged.
"Upon my soul," said another, "theres not a sentinel to be seen!"

It was light enough for him to be recognized.
"Well, why are you here to besiege me?"
"My dear fellow, I am an enthusiastic Épernonist."





and fifty men were stretched on the ground. The others, who were not

will pay you for that."
revoir, Canolles; you have the first game."
assailants retired in hot haste, taking their wounded with them, but
second bout! The Bordelais are obstinate; and, more than that, Ravailly
"Why not?"
there among them who had not in his young days haunted the woods and
at the house of the president.
for hope, was the source of bitter grief to Madame de Cambes; even so
beaten."

fell back."
opinion. Names are like colors, madame," he continued with his bilious

"there was this to be said against your idea of a regular siege, that

"I would like to know what your Highness would say if Richon were to
herself that the Bordelais would make Canolles pay dear for his triumph.
will be reduced one-fifth."
Madame de Cambes stifled the cry of dismay that came to her lips.
inflexible."

hear," said Lenet, checking the effort Madame de Cambes was making to


"On such day and at such hour as your Highness pleases," said Claire.
do a little intriguing. I have heard of a certain Captain Cauvignac,

"Well armed and equipped?"
resorted."
As Cauvignac had said, they were very much out at elbows, but

"You are very inquisitive."
"Its very likely,--unless, in addition to your secret method
gave Monsieur Cauvignac ten thousand livres by way of advance for the


conditional sales."
ear, and the Cauvignac company, followed by all the idlers whom its

Île Saint-Georges on the instant.


    embroidered the arms of the lords of Cambes, to whom Île
Canolles read and re-read the letter, shivering with fear at every
"The fanatics!" said Vibrac. "I should have supposed we had given them
to danger often exhibited by those whose profession brings them face
For a moment Canolles was struck dumb, and stood motionless, with the
time or another, but the crevices had evidently been detected in time

danger."
"Of escape? Why so?"

"In a small iron-bound chest."

placed his hand on the viscountesss letter, and that gave him strength


stationed near him.

stone would be left upon another in the whole fort. That is how quiet

pouring forth in floods from a low, arched doorway opening into a
He took her in his arms as if she weighed no more than a feather, and
answer to me for her upon your head."
For an instant Canolles looked after the fair, white phantom, as it
_"Parbleu!_ a pretty question!--sell our lives dearly, of course!" and
they couldnt whip us in a fair fight."
proffered courtesies! I ought, though, to be well-used to your ways.
barricade ourselves, and we wont surrender at all events until they
soldiers gun, and used it as a club.
"Faith, commandant," said he, "my account is settled; do you look now

axes, but the fusillade did not abate; they were firing at random,
Madame de Cambes.

The pale face of the viscountess indicated such resolution that
him to give me an opportunity to have my revenge."
There was one very peculiar thing, which is capable of explanation,

position so good-humoredly and yet with such becoming dignity; the

a few lines: and the permission being granted, he sent Nanon the
It was four or five days before he came to the end of the banquets and
him invitations to one or two houses in the city.
At night he thought over what had taken place during the day.
the fourth his captivity was the talk of the town; more could hardly be
capacity of upholder of the royal authority, was detested almost as
Lavie was no other than the bewitching brunette to whom he so gallantly
wish to be exchanged?"
"Well, why should I get excited over it? Do you imagine that it
yourself with politics, which is a very wearisome pursuit, while I make
go and throw stones at Monsieur Lavies windows. When the glass was

    remember, and the fate Monsieur _lAvocat-général_ would
could in an occasional glance bestowed upon him by Claire when the

to check the growth of the pure flame which she sought to inspire.
him to be stricken to the heart in very truth. Her warlike ardor had
gestures and his eyes, as well as of his mouth, was so closely confined
and being always fearful for his head which he was very near losing
to duplicate the fate of La Rochelle?

his beloved,--in looking at his watch, running aimlessly hither and

that, at the tribunal of truth.
severe as we have been indulgent. Precarious situations demand decisive
what you said to me, after the happiness you led me to anticipate,

a weeping, moaning woman, who would give her life for me, and yet she



only friends; they who know you not respect you, and they who know you
"Ah! thanks, thanks, my love," cried Claire, giving him her hand. "My



forward more rapidly than the army. A warlike entry at Vayres would

under the queens eye, but constantly harassed by the everlasting
cardinal.


which had evidently been thrown up within a few days.

But she saw nothing of all this.
confident expression she forced herself to maintain, she began to be
gathered about him.
"Such things are not forgotten, monsieur," the marshal replied. "Will
The young king, in his delight, drove his spurs into his horse, and
demonstrations. Monsieur de La Meilleraie seized the bit of the kings


king, and the queen regent?"
"Tis well," said Guitaut; "that is all we wished to know."

ready to carry the outwork by assault, and the other half to cover the
"Make no reply," said Monsieur de La Meilleraie, "but march on."



"Oh! nothing, madame," the child replied, "except that some day I shall

"Captain Cauvignac, madame."
"Because, if he is of your Majestys army, and seeks an audience, he

"What mean you, sirrah?" demanded the queen, with a frown.

"Indeed!" said the queen, dryly.
"Madame," said Mazarin, in an undertone, "I think that you are

"Yes."
"You shall have them."

utmost deference, Cauvignac presented a paper to the queen, who read as

[Footnote 1: There is a play upon words here which cannot be reproduced

"And has he gone thither?"

the hand and left the room; and, without looking to see if she was
position.
At the queens side was Mazarin, whose crafty, mocking features had
had no sooner stepped ashore upon the left bank of the Dordogne and

silent.
intrenchments thrown up in haste by Richon were earthworks; there were

As it was perfectly calm, and a dense smoke hung over the battle-field,
At last the royal artillery ceased firing altogether; it was evident
Some invisible power seemed to protect him, for he was constantly in
Luckily flight was close at hand, and spread a veil, so to speak, over
"True, madame," rejoined the cardinal: "I know the value of gold, but I


this reinforcement was being discussed in council. Claire, seeing
obliged to rely entirely upon their oars. Captain Ravailly, who was in
eloquent of regret and affection that Canolles was almost happy that he

de Condé, with a smile.
happiness what you have given me in devotion; you will wait till the


"Your Highness honors me by recalling my devotion."
heart, and will soon possess the hand, of the loveliest warrior in my

"Monsieur Ravailly," said Lenet,--for the messenger was no other than
but all remained mute, save Lenet.
The princess, pale with rage, was about to hurl at Lenet one of the


Lenet, "betrayed, do you understand? Let us look to his safety at once.
he?"
"To prevent at all hazards the death of a gallant officer; for if

select. Having written the letter she looked about for a messenger.
making in obedience to what resembled commands much more than

the indignant princess. "But what is the meaning of all this music
very much mistaken, however, if all this noise does not mean that
"Have we not the governor of Île Saint-Georges?" said the princess.

Meanwhile the crowd continued to increase in size, as all the detached
gestures? Why, madame, they are trying to force their way through the
go!"
With that he shrugged his shoulders carelessly and began to laugh.
melancholy entry into the capital of Guyenne.
"Monsieur Cauvignac!" cried Lenet.


you."

"Unfortunately," said Lenet, "I am forced to admit that what monsieur
"Madame," Cauvignac retorted, "as I am neither king nor prince, but

you shall be numbered henceforth among my retainers. Messieurs, she
This discourse, delivered in a dramatic voice, and with majestic
when I fell in with a party of your troops, who arrested me. I did not
take.
variety, recognized Cauvignacs exceeding shrewdness, and, for the

themselves in the main fortification. Now Monsieur de La Meilleraie
By the cessation of work upon the trenches, by the new dispositions

arms and fixing his eyes sternly upon the malcontent.



see that I have five hundred cowards!"
fighting against his Majesty our king. Now the greater number of us
surrender; as my soldiers abandon me, let some one negotiate for them,
"And you have no special instructions to give me, commandant?"
Richon smiled sadly, shrugged his shoulders, and withdrew to his own
"We know all that, Monsieur le Maréchal: it was all arranged last
return to the camp.
justify him in her sight. It was this hope which led him to remain
ferocious, withering gaze; and before Monsieur de Mazarin, who said to
courtiers.
affectionate solicitude in the pains he had taken to send her away
implored Monsieur dÉpernon, upon her knees, to set her brother at

Nanons delight was beyond words. To have Canolles once more in her
"To-morrow, perhaps."

"I, madame!" cried the duke. "Your Majesty is most certainly in error;
I did appoint him he must be a faithful servant of the king."


"You can go back to the queen," she said, returning, "and tell her
"It must be so, as that signature is written at the foot of Monsieur

"Throw a cloak over his shoulders, put a mask on his face, and give me
with invisible ink, to appear upon the paper.
said Richon, simply.
paper came into the hands of Madame la Princesse, or of Monsieur de La
not hesitate to fire upon his king, may well be capable of selling a

Richon began to understand his situation, as the judges took their
others, have invoked under the like circumstances."

advance-guard, to march upon Bordeaux."
imposition of the death penalty, and at a sign from the Duc dÉpernon


in our hands."

you are murdering one who is innocent!"

ladder with unfaltering step, his noble head towering above the crowd,
the farthest corner of the room.
mere upstart hanged? Come, dear Nanon, come to your senses! Why, God
enacted at Libourne, Madame de Cambes, seated beside an oaken table,
    utmost importance that you conform to it in every respect.
    "I should like that place to be the Carmelite church, of
love; he recurred instinctively to his memories of Nanon,--of Nanon,
which he did not even try to struggle, because his present slavery was
wealth be considered? wealth does no harm); to remain in his Majestys
although she would certainly have in her hands all the means of doing
Luckily Canolles had one sure way of forgetting everything else, and

Madame de Condé that she had before her eyes a messenger of evil.
"What else is there? speak! speak! I am waiting."
"He was tried for high treason, and was condemned and executed."

"It is sheer savagery!" said Lenet.
promptly with the same stroke."

impulse was to return to Madame de Condé; she met her on the way, but
With that he passed on, leaving Claire in deadly terror. For, by one of

his appearance.
visibly embarrassed, and they to whom he did not directly address
to the river; I would give ten, twenty, a hundred louis, if need be, to

"Yes."

you tell me where you are taking me?"

"Ah! monsieur," the sergeant replied, "those who pity you make no

close friendship between the two men will be remembered. "Was he killed
charming for its simplicity,--and throwing a light cape over her
"One word, madame, I entreat," said she; "what decision has been

"Yes, madame," the duke replied.

one who is a prisoner on parole."

"You see, little one," said Madame de Condé, "that it is impossible for
They entered the council chamber; it was about eight oclock in the
trembling.
The clerk called the roll of the judges, and each one rose in turn and
authority to the winds and taken the law into their own hands, or
Lenet could listen to no more; from the place where he stood he rushed
"Unfortunately, indeed," said Lenet.
"Madame, take the opinion of all, and then retain only those of whom

therefore, and I will do so."
permission to retire."
it.



Not a sound could be heard in the hall; all eyes were fixed upon the
"There is no great merit in that," said the princess dryly, "for I am
two prisoners. Soon steps resounded on the stairway, halberds rang upon

"You have told the truth?"

"After you, monseigneur," replied one of them.
your court jargon in my presence, I pray you, for I do not understand
fair that we should hear these accused persons."

Lavie realized that his continued presence would result in adding to

The judges, who had left their seats in disorder, sat down once more.

more difficult to respond than to question."
of the two names do you require me to give you?"

"Ah, yes! upon that point it is impossible for me to reply to your
"But I myself made you a captain," said the princess, "and you are
contest its validity."
"But you were taken upon the road to Braune, monsieur."
"Good. Now, monsieur, sign your deposition."
of so great a princess as your Highness!"
of the second. Cauvignac had effaced Canolles.
When the last signature had been appended, the princess, who had her
resolution, than the door was thrown open, and Madame de Cambes, pale
"Because, madame, this same Monsieur de Canolles saved your Highness at
duty to his love."
soldiers,--Monsieur de Canolles, who might have escaped, but who
Thereupon Lenet, who had not as yet spoken, approached the princess.

had devoted to the honor of your family."

that he is safe. I will make known my decision to the two dukes."
underground dungeons.
them from the council-hall were instantly circulated throughout the
such lugubrious preparations were being made.
could so savagely demand the death of two of their fellow-creatures;
me. Oh! every moment that passes without my trying to find a way to
to retract the promise she gave me? And yet to leave him to pass the
crowd, the sinister glare, which shone into her room, where there was
"No," was the reply: "I feared that you were but partly reassured, and


"Poor child!" said Lenet, in a most compassionate tone, "why did you
"Consider, that he must hear these fearful noises, and believe that he
"I am old, dear viscountess, and suspicious just because I am old,--not
desire; I was praying when you arrived that I might be allowed to see
acceptable to me, for I love you like a father; thanks."
Claire took it and read:--
by the strong; having no protector, he pays for him who has; he is an


Poor Richon! he was a gallant fellow! His death will redouble the
unpleasant hours all the same. Poor Claire! she must be in despair;
death by a cannon-ball, as I would have done--as I would have done if
for an instant, when I saw the stern face of the princess, and the


"They are not very polite," thought Canolles, "but they drink well; one
monsieur, for it is very kind of you."
gradually changed to profound compassion. He bowed and left the room.
hat to the floor, and the lovely blond tresses of Madame de Cambes fell
you say? In Heavens name, are you not to see me more than this once?"
"What is it that you know, pray?" queried Canolles.
alarmed than you seem to be?"

"Hanged!" he cried; "Richon,--a soldier!"
condemned; you were doomed to die; death was very near to you, my

again!"
"The sigh, my dearest, is for the poor wretch who pays for our joy with
Suddenly, for the second time, a heart-breaking sob shook her frame,
your own sake, and for mine. In a few hours we shall meet again never
"The devil!" muttered the officer, "luckily I know that the poor fellow
difference."
to return to his own cell. If he knows nothing, tell him nothing; if
somewhat pale, but with a jaunty air and with head erect, entered the
its very doubts.

fatality; and he had but one desire,--namely, to talk for a few
then, when he saw that the door was securely fastened, and the wicket
person with whom he had come in contact on the two occasions we have
here," rejoined Canolles, trying to put a good face on the matter, in

excellent Braune wine you know of. Alas! I might have drunk my fill of
"What do you want?" he asked.

advantage of their conversation to converse ourselves. Here, my little
"Nonsense!" said Canolles.
as you call yourself."

"I say that I have a right to be treated by you as a brother, or at
is that of bearing the name of Roland de Lartigues, and of being
"What has become of her?" Canolles asked.
wine to make a fellow forget."

upon an hour or two more to live; thats but a short time."




Cauvignac made a grimace which would have been comical at a less solemn

only it isnt hanging! Oh! I am coming, _pardieu!_ I am coming. You re
"Do you sometimes pray?
left behind like the silence of death.


Cauvignac, having decided that he did choose, had already extended his

"Yes--no--that is to say--Why the devil do you ask me that?"

less than five minutes set them both ashore upon the other bank.
THE ABBEY OF PEYSSAC.
and defied danger of the most appalling kind; and her sturdy, loving
Nanons swoon lasted two hours, and was followed by a frightful attack


"Of him, Monsieur le Duc, of him!" cried Nanon; "you have killed him!
avenge upon him the murder of the man whose murder you were responsible
_"Mordieu!_ you are right," said the duke, "and I have lost my wits.


    means to set him free; bribe his keepers with whatever sum
The messenger set out and was at Bordeaux within three hours. He went

"yes." The messenger, half-dead as he was, had sufficient strength to
As she brought her eyes back to earth, she saw at her side the Duc
rich in my love, and happy in the anticipation of the new life that
"Cauvignac!" the duke repeated, looking wonderingly about, evidently in
save Francinette, who was very pale, and Cauvignac, who did his utmost
made his care, was identical with the Cauvignac who had levied troops
reasoning,--for, credulous as he was, he began to be suspicious of
The duke, having decided to play the part of Orgon and Géronte to the

turned; "if he had remained a moment longer, I believe I should have
"To succeed in what?" demanded Nanon; "we understand one another this
"I know that he is a man whom you prefer to your brother, since you
in the best organized minds death never presents itself as a certainty,
"Ferguzon."
"Alas! your death would prove your good-will, but it would not save
you by the closest ties of blood. Forgive me, my dear sister, but what



keenest anxiety her face and her humor, was Claire, evidently awaiting
"And the seventy-eighth will be at the foot of a pardon, will it not,


took time to thank her Highness, and rushed from the room pressing the
"Over yonder."
"Do you think it advisable that I should be present?" inquired the

the gallant men who devote their lives to your service."


procession left the palace to go to the prison.
remained on her feet.
"He is--my _fiancé,_" said Madame de Cambes, hoping that this
The lieutenant bowed and took the paper.
and with Cauvignac, and he went about the duty assigned him with the

turnkey; "you can choose the best-looking."
have kept my word: I have obtained your pardon as I promised; I have
continued to drag Canolles through the corridors. Canolles let her have
appeared upon his features.

Princesse de Condé signed the order for Monsieur de Canolles to be set
disappeared; his child, whom we questioned, says that his father and
gasping for breath at his side.
clemency."
said a few words in the officers ear, then took his departure with
heart-breaking affection, and shuddered as she looked about upon that
"You must continue your search," she cried; "perhaps they have not
he has barely had time to reach Madame la Princesse; give him time to

At that moment the outer door opened.
"Embarrassed!" cried Claire, "what does that mean?"

to the woman whose death one word from his mouth might cause. "My God!
pretending that he had something to whisper to her, drew her to his
"Where are you, my friend? I cannot see you; one word, one word I pray,

"Monsieur, you doubtless understand that the departure of your

seems that nobody has any regard for his word to-day."

instants of happiness scattered here and there like islands in the
the day I was besieged at Saint-Georges, when the Bordelais showed the
leave to take, a moment to accustom myself to the thought of death; if
"One moment," cried Lenet, to gain time; "one moment, Monsieur le Duc!
understand.
sides with a calm and confident glance, and said sternly to the duke:--

to your feelings; remember that these men are looking at you, and that
"Do you wish me to go in search of her, and bring her to you?" asked
"What does he say?" the duke inquired of the captain of the guards.
place of execution.
"Do not speak of mercy before Monsieur le Duc;" retorted Canolles;
"A gibbet!" cried Canolles, halting, and pointing to the structure. "Is
"It is not in my own name that I speak," Canolles interrupted, "but in
he failed to find it there, the realization of his situation came over
"Richon was hanged alive, monsieur," was the cold reply.

A roar of rage was the only reply.
taking him under the arms, while the other adjusted a noose around his

execution a plan which his inventive genius had formed in half an hour
confidence that he had but to hand it to Madame la Princesse to ensure
sensation as he read what follows:--
    quarter of an hour! You need not release Canolles until you
for the mere pleasure of being generous! _Morbleu!_ she shall see that

another woman was kneeling.
put Richon to death, and if we do not return like for like we shall be
the other to escape?"
find herself face to face with Barrabas.
"I have no idea what there may be in this letter," said she, "but in
operations,--but no, they would not believe you," she added, and
to Château-Trompette. There, favored by the darkness, and rendered
Cauvignac stood up in his stirrups and looked in every direction,
end of the infamous rope; but it was nothing more than a corpse.

done.--By the way," he added after reflecting a moment, "as she is to


"Do you see nothing?"
perform a miracle in her favor.
Bordeaux! take me to Bordeaux!"
"I am going to Bordeaux."

horses on the gallop or Ill blow your brains out."

their shouts, the others by their loud neighing.

darkness like a cloud driven by the wind.

inflexible in carrying out his orders as an old soldier should be,
and Madame de Condé above all others, inasmuch as a visit from her,
when her attendants were beginning to lose hope, her reason suddenly
Pompée stepped a short distance into the room and clasped his hands
speak, and which then fitted closely to her slender, graceful form, now
requesting an audience."

officers, maids of honor, courtiers, thronged to Madame de Condés
his hand. But Claire, without accepting it, walked past him toward



"Your Highness does not deign to reply," said Claire; "do you refuse?
Madame de Condé when she came to herself.

One by one the nuns disappeared beneath the sombre arches of the
denied it? The world has done me naught but injury; society has been
At that moment she heard a voice at her ear; it was the voice of the

something of nobility perhaps, but her presence exhaled an
"Madame," replied the stranger, "I have been so happy that in my pride
where no curious gaze will be fastened upon you, oh, madame! madame!
"There is but one path that leads to God, my sister," replied the nun,
strict accordance with our rules perhaps,--I have not been abbess long
will comfort you; he will replace the friends or kindred you may have
"Oh!" cried the stranger, in an agonized tone which made the superior
let me tell you what awaits you here, if your sufferings are equal to
buried in the church of Peyssac; let me weep upon his tomb, which is
"Oh, madame!" she said at last in a voice which she struggled to
shaking her head.

she seemed ready to expire at her side.
ever suffered more than I suffer at this moment?"
lightly that they scarcely bent the blades of grass beneath their feet,
house. Except to pray, they had not for an instant broken their

masters face.
over long for a man of his character. He appealed therefore to his


gate upon the road.


"Not only no repugnance, but great pleasure."
see you no more. Very well! although its a very painful thing for me
Nanon, who had listened to this flow of words with lowered head, raised
"Well, yes, little sister," said he, "I swear--by what? I know not.
equipment, wont you, little sister? Would I could carry away all your
"I mean that you are to go to my house at Libourne before it is


"I have no use for that money now."
"Yes, dear brother."
"But its stark madness," said Cauvignac; "I am your brother, Nanon,
and I could not die."
my heart, which I shall carry with me wherever I go, and the pain it
not be so well guarded. And if they ever get at you, if ever a hair
contained eight persons, with a whole household of lackeys and pages.
"The queen! the devil!" said Cauvignac; "lets keep out of trouble in

After Monsieur dÉpernon, Monsieur de La Meilleraie.
"Walk beside me, duke, and repeat some of your excellent maxims! you

At that moment the carriage drove rapidly up behind the illustrious
people who are worse than I; and by Marys death! I propose to try to

of his collaborator Maquet, and before his return to Paris to found
forest in which the little town seemed to occupy a small clearing, and
have lived your long life--the life of beech trees and oaks; that the




body once more pursues its journey; but the body without memory is as
kindness, seeing that he cannot return to youth, allows youth to return
story of Ange Pitou, his fair _fiancée_, and of Aunt Angélique; after
In either case, then, it is of the first importance that I should bring
privileged animal and made welcome wherever he appeared, more especially
outline remains in my memory, and about whom, as far as I recollect,
met under his chin in a half circle.
its destruction; for the destruction of his old, well-coloured cutty
except in a sort of whistle, which was hardly intelligible.

“And how long have you been _nightmared_?” continued my father

devil’s circle.”

was still wide-spread among the peasantry in the country districts. He

about spells! By my faith, no! it was not Monsieur Lécosse.”
if I had taken nothing.”
“Yes, General, but not out of obstinacy.”
or into the chicken-houses, to kill the chickens, like the fox; or into
there was no need of explanation between my father and Mocquet, they had




sabot-maker; but, if the black wolf is the devil, Mocquet, as you say he

“And what happened that night?”

miles, if I go through the wood--and get back here this evening; the
taken into his head that an old woman


“Well, General,” replied Mocquet cheerfully, “I’ve got rid of the old



“You don’t guess, then, that if I come and buy powder here from Madame,

My mother had been watching us through the window; she suspected that
“And supposing some harm should come to him?”

“You are not taking him away this evening, Mocquet.”


“What Mocquet? What would you say?”
“No, no, go, my child,” she said, “Mocquet is right; you must, sooner or
because of the cold that I was crying.
“Yes, I know, you are a capital riser over night, and to-morrow morning
telling you tales till midnight? Our good priest, perhaps?”
leaning both hands on his gun, his face beaming out upon me, as, at
of good wolves!”
“And the keepers?” I went on.
“And I am going to have pity on your youth and put a bundle of wood in
he filled two small glasses with a yellowish coloured liquor, which did
said to require three men to drink it, one to drink, and two to hold
shoulder, and off we start.”
sure that the wolf had not left the covert. Meanwhile the field-keeper
they gave two short barks, and were then silent. The keeper followed

“We have him! we have him!” cried Mocquet, “the lad has hit his mark!

Mocquet shook his head.
“Well, it’s easy to find out if I did hit him, there would be blood on


“I have been luckier than you, then, for I have found it.”


“Nevertheless it is so, and I will prove it to you.”

the skin of the devil, or kill those who have made a compact with him.”
“the General told me that I might let you know about it when you were
separated, each going his own way; I went back with Mocquet, who then


building of the twelfth or thirteenth century, rugged and gloomy, its
among his fellow Christians. With the animals of the forest it was
especially after the re-marriage of his Royal Highness with Madame de
Even as the German executioner walks alone, behind the nobles and in
faith he had in the general quality of his hounds, and in their keenness

“Yes,” Marcotte went on, “but the damned beast has employed himself so
“Well, having been so taken up with the wolf,” answered Marcotte, “I

wolf, was willing to make the best of a fine buck in its stead. The hunt
bank, back again into the bed of the stream, made another leap to the
stood the hut of Thibault, the sabot-maker.
_Abencerrages_ of M. de Florian.

At twenty years of age Thibault had certainly had dreams of being
a mere shoe-maker had become Master of a Frigate, or even Lieutenant. So
forty francs over for Thibault.
He learned amongst other things that, although it was as well to keep
throwing the boar-spear only fatigued the body, without procuring him
liked best, Thibault chose the spot near the osier-beds, where the roads
mattress, to be paid for in full by the end of three months. The


There was nothing therefore very surprising to him in the sight of the
head.”
There was evidently something in the manner of the Baron’s questioning
“A buck, was it not? a ten-tiner, eh? with great horns.”
“I will be in whatever humour it may please your Lordship I should be.”

Thibault made as if trying to remember; at last he replied:

exasperation by disobeying his command, he thought he had better go
“Take that!” said the Baron, as he first felled Thibault with his whip,
me tell you, my fine fellow, it is not you who will eat the buck you are
There were two ways of doing his deed open to Thibault; either to hide
securely fastened, and a pint of wine beside him, tête-à-tête with a
appearance, rose from behind the rock, poised his boar-spear and sent it
Thibault knew the country quite as well as the animal he was pursuing,
in proportion as the difficulty increased, the greater became Thibault’s

spite of his fifty-five years, headed the chase as if he had been a man
bridge.
but they could find nothing.

moments of the chase, but this word _trash_, applied to his dogs, was
sake of all my past services to you, do not attack me in my office of
“My Lord, I meant it only as a manner of speech. What is a truth, what
near to the Baron and timidly laid his hand on the horse’s bridle.
“Strike, if you will, my Lord, but after that look up into this tree,
what sort of creature we have to deal with.” And putting his hand to his
Thibault, “will it please you to answer me, yes or no.”
come, but as it did not, he pulled the trigger; the gun went off, and a
skill, “if it is not my joker of the morning! Ah! so, you scamp! did the
any beating about the bush, what has become of our deer.”

him, blood would have flowed; look, I pray you, sir,” continued Thibault

“Ah, ah, Master Simpleton! there is something which witnesses terribly
This order caused great rejoicing among the menials, who thought it good
was a distress to him to listen to the cries of the culprit as they
The Lord of Vez looked down at the young girl. She was indeed a lovely


the girl with a smile.
asked for, she threw off her wooden-shoe, placed her dainty little foot
those that went before. It must be added, however, that he was unbound
of the country do you come, Agnelette?”

“Well, we give Master Wolf a pretty rough time of it; but, there is a

alone with the girl, were not for the one who had saved his life, but
behaved with women.”
“What, in belabouring me with blows!”
I saw you throw your boar-spear, when you were hidden there, behind the

to kiss you, but you would not let me, for you said that it was only
he asked:
Thibault made a movement, which Agnelette either did not, or pretended
“Oh,” replied Agnelette, with an adorable smile, “there is no fear of
farthing more than those of the poor? At times, when I have been loving
He, the man who had spent hours at a time watching the beautiful and
It has been already stated that Thibault was a handsome young fellow,
“Whenever you like, Monsieur Thibault.”

which seemed far too heavy for so slender and delicate a creature.
possess Agnelette had been quickened by the innocent frankness with
CHAPTER IV
conscious that his goat--of which I think we have already spoken--was
the most lamentable cries. Perplexed, and cross at the same time, the
it did not make the slightest attempt to move, but merely gazed out at


him, “the buck is a fine windfall, whether it comes from God or the
with me, it will then be time enough to free myself from his claws:
devil, however strong and cunning he might be, would ever dare to cross

steps, that the Baron, as he galloped along, could actually distinguish
leading a buck through the forest of Villers-Cotterets; the first keeper
detected a sound like something scratching at the door; he was just
often heard tell that wolves barked like dogs, but never that they
“Now then,” continued the wolf, “let us be sensible and talk together
make me some return for the service I have done you?”

they will be here.”
he had now got the upper hand, “what will you do for me in return?”
true; to-morrow, I shall want something else. For some time past I have
“I should have the greatest pleasure in doing what you ask,” said the
“Look at the spot where I was,” said the wolf. Thibault drew back in


shot to the shed. He unfastened the buck, which, as if propelled by some

happened to interrupt the conversation, “that it is out of my power to
among their number.”
of profiting by our neighbour’s calamity, whether he be friend or foe.”
certain Jew of my acquaintance did from his debtor.”

“We shall see about that, Master Thibault. And now you go back to your
there.
distraction.
“And, after all,” he went on, “why shouldn’t I revenge myself on this
power, he still feared the Devil might only have been playing on his
cold sweat broke out over Thibault’s forehead. “Ah!” he exclaimed, “What
sound of a gong, and again others in a falsetto key, like clarionettes
uneasy at the towering passion into which it had thrown my lord. He made
leaped with it into the very middle of the stream, both horse and rider
ministered to his pleasure, whether man or beast. In a loud voice he
of sand on to which the current had washed him. Marcotte was dead; there
being accomplished, he had not been conscious of the slightest sensation
men had laid him on the heap of heather which the shoe-maker had piled
“Really! you have a goat?” cried Engoulevent, “oh! my friends! now our


all events for a second time the same day, to similar good offices. His
a dagger.
requested the lord of the place to give him a flask or two of sound old

excuse, the great agitation he still was under, owing to Marcotte’s
“Yes, yes, Agnelette, I see you, and recognise you; yesterday, it would
“I am an upright man,” he murmured to himself, “and it is my duty to
see, it was the very thing for Thibault.
that, with the devil up his sleeve, he need not trouble himself about
which he was quite willing, he swore, to forget all the grievances which
day was over, and therefore set out about nine o’clock in the morning.
the grass with her sickle, but hearing someone approaching she lifted
“I dreamed of you, Thibault, because I love you,” she said, “and I




“Oh!” said Agnelette “you should not kiss my hand, Monsieur Thibault, it

does this mean?”
“Where?” asked Thibault.
pointed to with her finger? Had God branded him, as He branded the first
down, looked at himself. He saw the same eyes, the same nose, and the
not got sufficient hold of it, he tried another way, winding the hair
in and found his fragment of mirror, got hold of his hair again, seized


took the footpath which runs direct to Pisseleu across the fields.
letting his donkeys go on alone. Thibault was the first to speak:
“You tell me you are delighted to see me in a tone of voice fit to bring
my foot inside it!”
it.”
“Why, you are in love; nothing more difficult than that to guess, I can
cousin, “and with whom are you in love?”


“Well, there it is,” said Thibault philosophically. “Man is so
Landry. After a minute’s silence, he continued: “Well, well, you are not
“Well, but why do you pay your addresses to this mistress of yours?
“Oh, if I was sure of that, I would begin to try at once ... although
“Because, as they say with us, ‘Best let sleeping dogs lie.’”
forms a little pond, which is shaded by pollard willows, and slender
not hitherto experienced; but then he had never before gazed on it under
up into the granary, and a girl was bringing another sack filled with
to know who the stranger was who had returned with her head boy.
was speaking to him, she kept on looking over his shoulder at something
assistance to get rid of him?”
laughing at Thibault’s sallies, however, she cast stealthy glances now
fancied he might use like any other great lord: “Can it be possible,” he
Marcotte in the other world. But what a fool I am to bother my brains
THIBAULT’S WHISHES
were you in despair?”
movement of the shoulders, which, at any other time, would have made
cleverly as she may, they have a good scent, and will find him out.”
of her most fascinating smiles, asked him if he would like some
any one of that name ever been at the Mill.
heart beat so violently, that he thought it would burst, for without the
“She is right,” added Landry, “I am not twenty yet.”
not before the lad of the mill had found time to assure his dear

lived with the late M. Polet. Ah! Monsieur Thibault, Monsieur Thibault!
else who is his equal.”
“But who knows if he would always have retained his good qualities. Take

and I should have but one law and one desire, my law would be to obey
with an answer on ordinary occasions, he could not for the moment think
villain!”
mistress on hearing her cries, thought the pig’s behaviour was the cause
mistress’s final invective, made use of the opportunity to dash past

where he had sent the widow’s pig, and he was sure of being rid of them.
upon him. Moreover he had taken the precaution, on first entering the
There was no mistaking one for the other, either as to colour or size.
wolf. Not pausing to reflect whether it might not be unwise now to
thought he would climb up into the first thick-leaved tree he came to,
the great chest against it, that it might be better able to resist any
scattered wood-ashes of his hearth together and threw on them a bundle
preferred him to his cousin Landry. Was he no longer the handsome
make the best of the matter as it stood, and in future to forbear as far
been nothing more than a vague aspiration after ease and comfort, was
unhappy and low spirited, and felt that he had not the strength to keep
their designs towards him really were. Accordingly, thrusting a freshly

Villers-Cotterets, and at the price of a couple of crowns, the Innkeeper

assembled for feasting and dancing, or at other times drove out in

who had first wished for a haunch of the Baron’s buck, then for


is a grand affair for the owner, or for the one who farms it, not to
water as it leaves the sluice falls into a large reservoir whence it
or as they like, in gigs, pleasure vans, phaëtons, carts, on horse-back,
When the sluice is first opened, the water that pours through is

by the attention they receive from the pickers-up. These pickers-up are
finally the ponderous cuirassiers and heavy artillery to bring up the
peculiar organization, have momentarily at least, escaped the general
pure superstition, and is not the following solution the right and
use of his arms and legs so as to secure a place in the front row. In
opprobrious title. It is possible also that Thibault’s ideas were
collar. It reminded one of those black beetles of which the legs seem so

which women of all ranks possess in these matters, detected at once to

been wishing for so long.”
had been so ignominiously expelled her house by the mistress of the
And so with Thibault engaged in his calculations, and the Bailiff’s wife

beautiful women did not prevent him from liking a good dinner, gathered
unconscious that all the while Madame Magloire was closely watching him,
swearing that he would sooner lose the power to eat and drink than the

among them, and so I am going to the cellar myself.” And the good man
position. The two which he carried in his hands, and which he held with

“Epicure, epicure, not gourmand--you must not confuse the two things. I
And yet it was, as the Bailiff described it, quite an unpretentious
of butter that could only have been churned that very day. As

“Capital!”
worked for the chapel belonging to his Highness the Duke of Orleans, the
that it was only with some difficulty he could get through the narrow


fond of dress, too much given to elaborate head-gears, English laces,
impression on the shoe-maker, that, as we have seen, he could do nothing
him, he wished to know more about him. Thibault felt that it was very

with giddiness, and went and leant with his back against a wall. What
for we can no longer hide the fact that the weight so felt was that of a

“How, thank you? Ah! I dare say! thank you, indeed! You think the matter
bottles of wine!”
“By the devil!” he exclaimed, “let me tell you, my fine sir, that the
Thibault’s answer was a blow in the chest; it was well directed, and
his whole length on the ground, and lay there insensible.
Thibault found himself on the further side of _Les Fossés_, and in the
Madame Suzanne is in every possible respect just what you want! A
still hot in your mouth! why, even my friend the wolf would blush for me
advantage, I should like rather more than the usual share to fall to
way, but the dogs might wake up the inhabitants.
He was hatching a plot. He had not forgotten the promise he had made to
recruits, even to the very cubs of a year old.
old, which he now finished off.
sufficient to provide them a sumptuous repast. Borrowing a mule from a
as Maître Magloire was having the game he had received spread out on a
she was unable to make sure: and downstairs she came, therefore, in
over the supply of food which elicited such exclamations of admiration
pheasants stuffed with truffles, the partridges dressed with cabbage,
preparing for them.

and nearly went into hysterics. Maître Magloire, taking no notice of the
front of his wife in order to put out the conflagration blazing among


as was often the case with the Bailiff, he did not agree with his wife
himself, he kept putting up his hand to try and hide the unfortunate
Bailiff opportunities of frequent visits to the cellar.
Number one was Maître Magloire’s, number two that of his wife, and

mill-wheel at Croyolles, Madame Suzanne entered the room.
that he was madly in love with Madame Magloire, had ended by believing
Then she loaded her arms with all the bracelets she possessed.
whose mantle he had clung to, and whom he had so triumphantly disposed
under the category of heavy bodies.
who was with us this evening only left us half an hour ago.”
victim. His reflections were interrupted by the voice of the new-comer,
came up to his chair and leant her pretty arms over the back in the most
“The very same, my lord.”
husband; it was on account of your husband finding me without
is familiar to me, of that I am certain!”
himself? By Beelzebub! I’ll throw him to my dogs to eat!”


read in Monsieur Magloire’s face what was passing in his mind.
“Ah! pray excuse me, and believe me, had I known I was to have the


“nevertheless, I am curious to know how my poor wife can have received
trust it was nothing of the sort.”
The Bailiff turned pale and gave an exclamation.




‘the chaste Suzanna....’”

“And it was then, when she found herself in her room, and all alone,
“‘Come up, my lord, come up,’ she cried. ‘Come up quickly--I am sure



“Ah! I remember now,” responded Madame Magloire. Then, as if noticing
that man was fondling my knee under the table?”
against my will?”
scabbard, then, running toward the window which his wife had indicated,
Bailiff was not the only one who had seen Thibault. His wife and the
it with him, I promise you it shall not stay long in his hands. So,
living by making.”
“By the Devil and his horns! as you yourself remarked a little while
“Oh! the vile wretch!” she cried, “you see, I was right; he has got some
contempt for what he says, and I readily forgive him the way in which he
account it is best to submit quietly and to trust; one need have no fear

end to all this!”
rascal is actually reading me a moral lesson! My friend, you were
home, but sits astride a broom-stick oftener than becomes a good
preceding evening, to keep himself from asking that the whole house, and

his pace; he called to them; and the wolves came crowding round him.
“Ah!” murmured Thibault, “I am not then the enemy of all created things;
bearings and made for it; but he would have missed his way if the
Thibault crept inside; there he found a sort of seat cut out of the
branches of the trees, and having as yet none of the short-lived verdure
spring-like festival, now, in the heart of winter?
heard mingling with the notes of the violins and hautboy; now and again

at Villers-Cotterets, when dressed in her beautiful white dress at
the head with its flaming hair and the eyes with their fiery gleam,
last three month, Thibault, who had never had any intention of keeping
not be too late to return at any time, simply because he never dreamed
the foot of the altar when the priest was about to join them. But
went and crouched down in the darkest corner he could find in his
By what means can this game of nature’s, in which chance for ever holds

the outside. The unhappy man dared not look at himself either in the
legend of Doctor Faust. To what did the omnipotence conferred on him by
Ah! if he had but known! to him and not to Marcotte would he have willed
the desires of the peasants who had followed them, it was quite certain
“And, by my faith!” he exclaimed, “I am an idiot indeed to stay here,

as if recognising a voice he knew. And, as it turned out, this was one
François made no reply to this interrogation, but signed to Thibault to

for the two; all that he did was to send for another bottle or so of
“I am not surprised at that,” replied François, leaning back in his
“Jack-ass yourself, friend Thibault,” said François, laughing at the

_shooting_, but _huntin’_ and _shootin’_.”


“As to myself,” said the shoe-maker, a look of hatred to his fellow


“Well and good then! I will drink all three glasses myself,” and he
with a similar sign of understanding between them.
effects of the wine he had drunk, “are fit for nothing more than to be
all!”
the two wretched valets, François and Champagne, each of them had a
blows given and received!”
He rose to his knees, furious with anger, and shaking his fist at the

But Thibault could hardly believe his senses on perceiving that the
of corduroy, but of the most beautiful buckskin, fastened with little
Thibault was pleased beyond measure at finding himself clothed in such a
occurred to him--possibly the key was in the pocket of that other

that for four and twenty hours he might be the Baron de Vauparfond, and
harm should come to this other self before he came to; then, carefully
order on the spot.
hour was he expected? How was he to gain admission to the Castle? Not
kind of movement in the stables of an Inn, he called. A stable boy
was speaking to.” And he immediately stood on tip-toe holding the

Venus, that _he_ goes away this evening, that the Comtesse de
country, had occasion more than once to admire their instinct, and he
horse followed the walls of the park at a quick trot, carefully choosing
by the _way he knew_; it now remained to find the person _whom he knew_,
“Madame was terribly afraid that drunken fool of a Champagne might not
“Come, come,” said the maid, “we must make haste or Madame will complain
“Very likely,” said Thibault, “no doubt Cramoisi’s foot.”
“I call you Rose, my pretty one, because the rose is the queen of



she had thus secured.
anything like it, even in dreams; for one cannot even dream of things of
The central medallion was surrounded by a series of panels, on which
inhaled everything at a breath. For a second there passed before his
fit flower for such a sweet scented garden.
he bowed himself, feeling crushed at the sight of this luxury, of this
still remains the handsomest gentleman in all the country round. But,
his lips touched anything so like satin. The Countess now seated herself
done, and I assure you I have committed no other crime since yesterday
“Very well then! I will not begin by saying anything about your
Cramoisi!’”
“Yes, on the Erneville Road; where were you coming from?”
recluse, whom the jealous Baron keeps shut up there a regular prisoner,
“Indeed; but I was not there.”
“It is true then, that you danced four times with her?”
the Count!”
“What is to be done?” asked the Countess.
tower; here, the fugitives came again on to a staircase corresponding
thought more like a cry of pain. Thibault went in, put out his hand,
Mont-Gobert,” he said, “I swear that I will hamstring you, as you have
the two men crossed weapons.

and knew no more. Lestocq, called to his master’s aid as the latter
sky above him. He made another effort, and turning managed to lift
He had until nine o’clock that evening; but would he live till then?
then make out people walking along a road not far off on their way to
them from Raoul’s purse, accompanied by many thanks for all their kind


the recovery of his body. How many things people say in the presence of

bound became loosened; some disconnected words escaped him.
followed by his wolves. He saw himself making the acquaintance of Madame
found himself at a cross-road where three ways only met, and each of
And in the midst of all this hallucination, this delirious madness, the

some twilight region, which was neither life nor death, but seemed a
CHAPTER XIX
flaming pile. Thibault leaped from his bed, seized his boar-spear, and
down at the foot of a tree and buried his head in his hands. The events
should like to ascertain if the Baron is really dead.” A melancholy howl
said:
no one in the house; the priest had no doubt gone to give notice of the
footsteps approaching; at the back of the alcove hung a serge curtain,
“Alas!” she said, “what they told me was true!”
her eye. She put back the candle, took a pair of gold scissors from a
barred their further passage. Lisette screamed, but the Countess,
“Where can we find a better place?”

And so saying he slid down into a kind of ravine beside the road, and
“Because he knew his way up as well as I did! And oh! Madame! if you
still the Countess looked him full in the face without changing colour.
The Countess looked steadily at him and said:
leading into the corridor, “and Lisette left him here alone. You entered

the wing of the Castle opposite to the one by which they had gone up. On
pass the Count was wounded in the shoulder, and sank on one knee,
the half hour after nine in the evening.”

Thibault went out. The Countess went and replaced the pearls in her
On quitting the Countess’s room, Thibault had left the castle by the way
curiosity led him to climb down and see what it was. The shining object
goods.
executing some order for his master that night, and on the road between
cry of his hounds; the mighty huntsman was after game, but the chase did

trees and the castle.
fallen on the place.
And Lisette opened the door. “Go in,” she said.
worn to receive the Baron Raoul.
the Countess.
more and more thoroughly awake. There was a difference, however, for

declared the Count’s life out of danger.
clothes that I had on the last time _he_ came.”

single-handed, as everyone understood, when the valet feeling uneasy
not been January, you might have imagined a thunder storm was brewing;
When the recent serious events that had taken place at the Castle became
two gendarmes walked one in front, and one behind. Thibault had merely
expressed a wish that they might be the ones to do so.

are you talking?” they asked him.
The wolves, obedient to their master’s voice, gave one prolonged,
The men could no longer control their horses, which were rearing and
eat each other, whatever the proverb may say, and once having tasted
horses, clinging desperately to the cruppers and withers and throats of
his teeth, but this he found impossible. Then he tried to wrench his

him there, forming an immense circle round the ruins, and looking upon
regret. That which dominated all other feeling in him was his
And then the master of the wolves, like a chief of banditti followed by
unreasoning attacks of a pack of wild animals. Still it seemed manifest
organised and disciplined, and were far more formidable than a band of
The Bishop pronounced sentence of excommunication against the former
with l’Eveillé and Engoulevent, who, in consideration of his marriage
with his wolves; after a night of sack and pillage, he kept the pack
hunting a pack; only the one hunted in silence, which made it far the
honourably on the field of battle, having succumbed to a sixteen hours’
were on the side of the forest towards Viviers or Soucy, he and his
Both the Baron and Thibault carried out the task each had set before
peaceful and innocent. And more than that, he felt he loved her more
life, he was all of a sudden aroused by a cry of distress from somewhere
slope. Here a ray of moonlight, breaking through the clouds, fell on the
dreadful trouble for the poor old grandmother! Thibault, do not kill
“And do they say nothing of the infidelity which has led Thibault to
“I too loved you,” continued the young woman, “and I suffered cruelly
“Agnelette!” cried Thibault, trembling all over, “be careful what you
his finger, but as it had been too small to go on Agnelette’s finger, so
of this devil’s colour.
“What can I do, Thibault!” said the girl with the same sweetness and
from which you saved me, suddenly sprang upon me.”
extra trouble for us, whereas, in all probability we had long years of
“No, Thibault, if I loved you, I should do everything in the world to
longer belong to myself? do you not know that I am married?”
will have no other husband but me.”
“But what matter still, Agnelette, since you do not love him and since
On hearing these decisive words from Agnelette, Thibault again became

Thibault flung both hands up to his head.
him.”


might have been taken for the howling of a whole pack of wolves, and
forced by her failing breath, to pause at intervals along the way.
vitals, her hair stood on end and her face grew wet with perspiration.

“What has happened to you? Come, tell me all about it,” said Etienne,
Value instead of crossing the forest.”
As they drew near Préciamont, Agnelette, who had not spoken for a while,
perfect a confidence he had in his wife, Engoulevent was nevertheless
and hearing no answer to his challenge, he prepared to shoot. Looking up
brain made possible, to have mercy upon him. She called Thibault’s name,
would soon follow her husband to the grave. The voice of the old blind
the widow of his young huntsman, engaged in telling her beads; the other
cries ere long appeared on the threshold; they were in pursuit of the
Agnelette’s condition, after the terrible shock given her by Thibault’s
CHAPTER XXIII


wind beating against the branches of the giant oaks.






bullet from a keeper, or be caught in a trap, and then good-bye riches,


three hundred and sixty-five?”

Baron’s hounds, for, by the devil himself, I take a genuine interest in
white hair of the wolf was the one black hair which had remained to the
to say to his new huntsman a few paces off, “you hold the leash too
“I should like finely to put the dogs on its track,” said the Baron,


the devil and his horns! he shall be the dogs’ quarry in place of the

the left, he leaped into the little stream which rises there, waded down
of twenty dogs, which Monsieur de Montbreton’s huntsman was bringing up
riding on the tails of his dogs, his eye flashing, his nostrils dilated,
yelling pack of dogs, and, forgetting his present form, scatter them
Attichy, and finally got back to the forest of Villers-Cotterets at the
with excitement, did not see the gulf in front of them, or else, like
to wait for this, and left his hiding-place. Now swimming, now leaping
already beginning to sink, and shedding a dazzling light over the

towards him, if he himself went on; it was not safe to turn back, as he
he had fled to in his haste.
nevertheless, felt strangely moved as he looked on. Although the
death, wrapped in an ineffable calm, appeared more beautiful than when
which dead, must surely belong to him, since, living, it had belonged to
The dogs made straight for the bramble bush, and began worrying
forth Thibault was never seen again, it was generally believed that the



the Marquis de Souday, and was called, after its owner, the château of
reduced and shorn of their branches that the convulsions of 1789

his life a sacrifice, to his Royal Highness, had not just been hanged
own safety, and reached the frontier tranquilly with his companion,
mouths of so many poor devils. It is true that these soldiers were
Republic, commanded successively by Biron, Rossignol, Kléber, and
the Chevalier de Couëtu and Jolly, had collected his little army.
"I am accustomed," replied la Rochejaquelein, "not to follow, but to
Charette wished to reply by the same young messenger and thank the
huge satisfaction; for no one could head off a boar as well or urge on
we did the other."
We should be greatly tempted to follow Charette, and consequently our
his terrible victory at Les Quatre Chemins. It was his last; for
the 25th of March, 1796, the news came that four republican columns

He had almost reached the wood of La Chabotière when General Travots
"Souday," he said, "listen to my last orders."
"There! now," said Charette, "listen to me. The king who made me



landed him at Rotterdam. From Rotterdam he went to Blankenbourg, a

He returned to Holland, and from Holland he went to England. There
enforced idleness, without resistance under ennui, without energy to
Soon the looseness of his principles and the pressure of his needs
an infamous life, for which she was not meant, having always been good
land, satisfied his vanity. Little by little, he changed his course of
him but to rouse him, habit had acquired such an influence over him
longed for were all that were granted to her. She died of puerperal
important part in the narrative we are now undertaking.
happiness than ever. The humble chambers in which they had lived
After thus separating from all that united him with the past, the
than the departure itself; and thirdly (this was the gravest pretext),
himself off to eat the kings bread on his estate at Souday,--the sole
Deprived during his youth of a pleasure which in his family was an
of his past wealth and his past fame, when one morning, as he was
Eva that he was seized with genuine emotion; he kissed them with a

The Marquis de Souday went to bed repeating to himself the old
messenger was to give him the letter and, if possible, bring him back
apparently, that was not all that Jean Oullier expected to see, for
showing that in all probability they had only been stationed there to

"You must answer me," he said.

resolute as though his father were still at the plough, his wife
take him up behind him; but Jean Oullier shook his head.
embarrassment.
those of the cherubs that surrounded the Madonna over the high altar
hunter, but the barking and yelping of the whole pack of hounds. This
on her father, clasped his knees, clung to the garters of the
nothing, he was about to employ force when, happening to turn his
room; and the marquis continued his confidences with bitter complaints



"But you can never finish them, even if you work till daylight, my
    GRAVE THESE TEN YEARS.
masters wardrobe, but he actually found time to put the house in
where snipe abounded, and taking his master to the spot.
the glory of my house? Besides, what would be thought of me,--who am

and gossip with Jean Oullier on the stirring incidents of the old war,
position and that of other children whom he might have by a legitimate
marquis considered the presence of his daughters at the castle as
sufficiently concern itself with the needs of their sex. It was
The Marquis de Souday had seen all this without attempting to give any
de Souday taught Bertha and Mary how to play whist.
about real life and the habits and requirements of a world they had
ancestors had probably treated theirs. So when they saw him keep in
of these charitable ladies and young ladies, naturally inclined to
Maine-et-Loire; and if it had not been for the sea, which bounds the
few imaginative persons went further, and declared that one of
that did not feel himself degraded in raising his hat to them.

hares daily and hunt the boar on grand occasions, and play whist
the world should not be willing to kneel down to them.
his greatest fear--that the result of some quarrel, if he provoked it,
execution. Nevertheless, as rioting and disturbances were not yet
explanations to those of our readers who are not familiar with the
Duc de Biron. If there were no longer any wolves how could there be a
disrespectful hand upon them, and he rejoiced with great joy when he
big paws swelling and stiffening he sat down artlessly on his tail and
actions compromise success. As soon as the cub began to head in a
whether, as the rest of the cubs were evidently afoot, it would not be
mountains, or water-courses, without fear, without haste, trotting
same relative positions, and following a straight line at the same

furrowed with the deep ruts of which Lower Poitou keeps up the
slopes, at the top of which were rows of trees, the branches meeting


pushed and struggled violently, and tore his hands and face till both
back. There he was, caught in the hedge as if in a trap; and this
Then, still laughing, she jumped off her horse and ran to the poor
He lifted himself by his wrists and endeavored to propel himself
really a slight one, and only judged by appearances, became very pale
sobs, with difficulty restrained till then, he cried out, "Ah! the

the countenance of the young man; "for a hunter you seem to me rather
amusement of hunting, which consists in finding pleasure and gratified
"No, let me tie this on, I beg of you," said Mary.
which paralyzed all his efforts to get away, managed to facilitate

your hunting-jacket. Nevertheless, we were wrong; we admit it, and we


three persons who stood there, it made a rapid somersault and doubled
"You can tell your mother that the hare ran between your legs and your
Well, you must admit you have a vocation for it."
"No, mademoiselle; she is very kind and tender. She indulges all my
what the consequences have been!"

as it pleases among the castles built by fairy hands, which topple
man walked fast and seemed much out of temper. He was evidently the
"Yes, I saw it all from the heights of Benaste, which I was coming
Marquis de Souday, as much for my pleasure as for his."
taken when the young girls left him; then turning to the left he went
work; he knew the cost of the effort to his horses to start the plough

some slight disappointment. "If your late father had thought as you do
Monsieur Michel; there are not two Courtins in this part of the
thirty dozen oysters at a sitting say they couldnt even bear to look
indifference, "did you know that the Marquis de Souday was married?"
"Whom do you call the she-wolves?" said Michel.

Courtin no longer doubted that Michel had met the
what he coveted was the place of keeper or bailiff to the mother and
Mademoiselle Mary--"
the late vicar of Benaste, who was a fine sportsman, didnt say mass
the nobles are jealous of them, I make bold to say that the poor folk
Michel did not seem disposed to enter into the subject farther. As for
Courtin was respectfully lowering for his young master the bars which
might have been paying a visit in the Chaussée-dAntin or the faubourg
it, which his straw hat, although its brim was wide, did not
suddenly, stood silent and confused, unable to reply. Courtin came to
"It is easily told, Madame la baronne," replied Courtin. "I had a

his plough with more gayety than usually belonged to his disposition,
arithmetic to the reading and writing he imparted to him gratuitously,
latter year General Rossignol, who was sent to either pacify or
were the subject of the opening chapters of this book. Here is a
shoes and gaiters took an active part in the heroic campaign of
married to this daughter of his brother contractor, Monsieur Michel
la Logerie, like the good landlord and seigneur that he was, went to
a bridge built to open important communication between the department
philanthropic effort on the part of Baron Michel de la Logerie.
handcarts bearing the wine-barrels, not to speak of contraband game,
But when the huntsmen arrived at Légé they found that the baron was
nothing. It was also proved that this mans gun had not been fired
secret to let it ever be openly asserted.
Madame la Baronne Michel sincerely believed herself a saint; she went
care was therefore directed to save her son from the contagion of the
out of the torture to which she had subjected him for over ten years.
She was not duped by Courtins tale; the wound on her sons forehead
Michel thought of Bertha with some slight irritation. Who was this
himself that her anger would soon pass off, whereas the thing that
the baroness for her father, just attacked by the fever.


yourself."
"What wolves?" asked the young man not ill-pleased to bring the



"Pshaw! what do you mean by that? Would you have fired on the hare if
right to ride with their hounds over the harvests of the poor peasants
catch them."

"Well, so much the more reason why I should tell you that what you are
"Courtin," said the youth, with, a touch of the assumption observable
shall not give them up. Let him come after them, and when he does I
"As for that, it is easy to see what is happening; these people are
they meet at night it is for no good end, you may be sure. In any case
"you told me yourself, Courtin, that if they went about at night it
young ladies may be, I must say they are pretty. Come, you neednt
able to find one."

reply: If you are concerned in it, Monsieur Michel, I agree; I know
do."
Courtin cast an appreciative eye on the golden louis he had just
The young man was left alone with the two dogs.
to the reader, one to the ruddy color of his hair, the other to the
Michel pulled out his watch; it was a little after six. We think we
see. He wouldnt have gone a mile for that purpose; whereas to see

baron opposed this desire by planting himself firmly on his feet and
of leaning back he leaned forward, and his little jog-trot was
third time by the seeking man and the missing hounds. This time
Monsieur le Marquis de Souday myself."
The whole scene was so rapid that dogs and man were nearly out of


Michel forced himself to utter the word.


"Who are not rich?"
"They wouldnt mind that,--not they! Theres nothing dangerous to kind
But how could he suppose that a young girl of eighteen, the daughter
when he saw, at the angle of the road round which Rosine had
Michel sighed. By the firm and decided tone of voice he knew she was




through the first war in La Vendée under Jolly, Couëtu, Charette, La
Paris; and Madame de la Logerie had encouraged the intimacy of her son
At the noise the young people made on entering the sick man rose on
the well man, but having nothing of the kind he stood as near the door
"strengthen him up," as he said. His pot of cider tasted good, but he
come along. Seeing a man lying in the field, he called to him. Tinguy
pain in the right side.
What the exact nature of the fever was she was too ignorant of the
herself, laying a finger on her lips, and said in a low voice, so that


She did not need, this time, to reiterate her order. Michel sprang
Of course, in such a state of exaltation the young baron never dreamed

to Monsieur Roger:--
thing; but in a carriole!--ten thousand times better go on foot! A
physiological cataclysm now taking place in our hero had become a mere
the far distance. Impossible! it could not be he already; and yet she
Then, in order not to fall, he leaned with his hand against the wall.

doctors arrival. Michel stayed at the door to receive him. When he
                                 XII.


"Yes," she said, bending to his ear, "you are right. The doctor is one
last vital strength and fell backward on the bed.
"No," she said, "stay. We need you still; you must help Rosine to

"Madame left Massa on the 21st of last April, and she ought to have
"Is it possible! Failed?"
promises which had brought her to France--"




"Because what I was saying cannot be said out
"I am not a woman like other women," said Bertha, with an almost


will not say another word, inasmuch as you are not--as poor Tinguy
from his infancy with the wonders of creation? Had he watched, like
harsh, firm Bertha; instead of the self-reliant Bertha, he felt the
"Well, I hear," she said, her eyes gleaming and her ears alert, as she
riding one and leading the other.


"Papa returned home at full gallop, and finding where you were, he
"Not to be, as you said just now, one of you."
The young man stood motionless in the roadway.


"I beg you to excuse me for a few moments. A lady has arrived at the

"My dear count, I have the honor to present you to Madame la Duchesse
but--"


"I certainly have a cousin in Toulouse,--Madame de la Myre."
"Yes, come!" said Monsieur de Vouillé, his mind made up to risk the
"Pooh! we are on a campaign," said the duchess; "I permit it."
"Madame de la Myre?" interrupted the countess, eagerly.
"Now," said M. de Vouillé, "we must find seats for these new-comers,

"Madame is going to Nantes?" asked the prefect, by way of making a
"Two years ago last July."
have most at heart that I place him, at once, on my list of friends."
conversation. Nothing is so depressing as a silent dinner. I detest
arrangements were so carelessly made that it only required a
"And the Duchesse de Berry?" she said; "is it known what became of
"No one was addressing you, my good husband," said the duchess. "I am
take the interest of a gambler in the game that was being played
Paris?"
to re-embark on the Carlo Alberto."


"How can she get here?" asked the prefect.
a telegraphic despatch just received from Paris for the prefect.
indiscreet enough to betray the utmost surprise.
imprudent enough to pass through my department."

cottage when Bertha got there. Was it Bertha for whom Michel was
absent sister. Consequently, he was full of attentions and solicitude
Bertha, who, in spite of her youth, had more than once been present at
able to serve you that I try to let no occasion pass."
me to desert before the battle," he added, trying to smile.
exhausted him; the soul is going without a struggle, shock, or
"You heard me?"
the priests said, Rise and take your guns, I fought the enemies of
The vicar entered at this moment. Bertha showed him the sick man, and
The peasants trembled.
country people use when they make a journey.

cannot consent to expose you to it."
the insecure comfort."


pass.
"What is it now?" asked Petit-Pierre.
An exclamation of surprise burst from Rameau-dor, as the young man
Breton clothes.

"Stop; I dont say that I am positively decided."
"Michel, you are lacking in all the traditions of hospitality. You
"Well?--in the château de la Logerie?"

from these bushes."
would arrest you without a warrant."

"Then let us follow Baron Michel," said Bonneville. "Forward, baron!"
the castle."
"The wolves castle?"


they--informed by Baron Michel, had come to meet their uninvited
cannot often practise."

So saying, he entered the postern, with a graceful inclination of the
his young master had taken to return to La Logerie.
objects of his thought, and that the one whose image the baron
first time he had ever been late in getting home, and he felt
misled him; his mother was on the watch. His resolution vanished
The château de la Logerie consists of a large, square building,
attempt.
"Is that you, Michel?" asked the baroness.
young man so deeply that he was about to rush out and reassure her

Then, lowering his voice, he added, "What I have to tell madame is so
"It is inside the door."
prevented from opening the door by a petty pride, which had not
hour of his return home would not be known, and he might still have a
afraid youll have a deal of trouble to get him away from them."
would ever consent to such a marriage."
the shock was most severe.
capacities I have duties, Madame la baronne, which I must fulfil,
think for, Madame la baronne, and I tell you so now. I dare say he has
"My own two eyes, Madame la baronne; they are good, and I trust them."

"Nonsense! you would not think of it."
but I remember it, and on my word of honor I dont want to see the
others know, being blessed with a good ear and a gift for listening.

"Nevertheless, she is here," persisted Courtin.
"Well, as I want to remain your zealous and faithful servant, all the


night?" said the baroness.

                 COURTINS DIPLOMACY.


the light of this candle he saw what he could not see by the light of
"You, Courtin; and you want it much more than you choose to own."
lease of an informer?"

swear by Christ--"

"No," replied Michel; "did you not hear me say I was going to Souday?"
Rising as he said the words, with a firmness of which the farmer had
fear of going out alone at night; but, finally, her maternal
Michel much preferred this silence to a discussion in which his filial
rushing on like an avalanche, and a more vigorous organization than
he was really a prisoner, he went to bed and to sleep.
to fear that his captivity might last much longer than he expected.

bells which are usually fastened to the collars of post-horses. He ran
last moment, force him to get into the carriage with her, and away,

discover what it was.
We have heard Courtin tell Madame de la Logerie of the meetings of the
was usually of small importance, the influx of peasants on this
usual marketable produce nothing but stout cudgels of dogwood tipped
Most of them stood with their backs against the houses or the garden
whom they met there. In the towns and villages along the great
guards--the inhabitants of the country districts had penetrated to the
of the nature of the establishment. As for its regular customers, they
came to the conclusion that what it had so far considered an abortion
have thought himself so necessary to the government if he had not seen
refused to go on. She whipped him, he reared. On further whipping, the
way to Nantes she returned to Ancenis. The good dame was pious and a
natural heirs attacked it for some error of form, and the court at
events had encouraged this hatred, and it was now awaiting a favorable
of his two wooden legs, the most active and intelligent agent in the
On the day of the fair at Montaigu Aubin Courte-Joies drinking-shop
The furniture of this room showed its quintuple service. At the
second. Most of these were sitting round the table drinking and
stirring the fire and watching some dozen brown cups in which was
sitting on them, and smoking their pipes in an easy attitude. As for
Logerie,--Courtin had entered the outer room. Except for the little
"What shall I bring you, Monsieur Courtin?"
"Are you well, _gars_ Aubin?" he asked, addressing the tavern-keeper.
the behavior of the landlord and his customers.
almost menacing:--
signs which Aubin Courte-Joie made, exhorting him to prudence, "Maître
wish the death of each other. I have come in search of you to do you a
man[oe]uvre.
hastily as might have been expected after delivering his warning
nowadays, when quarrels are over and there are neither Blues nor
not talk with the mayor. Come, come, sit down here and have a talk
as necessary to the cause he had at heart.
wont prevent his paying his rent to Madame la Baronne Michel."
slowly emptied his.
"I dont wish you harm; I wish good for myself, as Aubin Courte-Joie,
the great war. Well, what did he gain by it?"

can make the money flow into the château de Souday, as it hasnt done

that farm may soon belong to some of you, and then it would be easy


the baroness will be as supple as a handful of flax. She is miserly,
"Yes, my friendship," returned the latter. "You neednt shake your

"Take care, Jean Oullier. I want to act a kind part, and I wont let
wished to show their gratitude to me in the way I ask I would rather
all about what happened in the wood at Chabotière. Perhaps I could
would gladly have gone your way."
I saw a man named ----, who was, or had been, a minister; and I heard

authorities in Paris knew of the projected scheme, and repressive
consisted of a company of the 32d regiment of the line. The day on

such matters, and I think I may safely assert that these people here

musician who rasps your ears with his hurdy-gurdy, a quack who vaunts
you a shot, and if by chance it misses you, and you are able to
"It would happen that some one of the rest,--perhaps that young _gars_
"Not a bit of it! They are worthy people, very worthy fellows; only,
"Bless me! Well, I want one."
you that biscuit, my good friend?"


The peasants had, in fact, drawn nearer and nearer to the little
"Go to the hotel, hang it! Come," said the general, looking about him,
the royalists, who were the majority of the canton. It was then that

face of the public functionary.

"Because I, too, have had some confidences."

    May 14, 1832."
                   her whom we are expecting.
"Ah, _ça!_ didnt you tell me these people were sly and cautious? I
two gentlemen from Puy-Laurens to La Flocelière."
"Confound it all!" replied the public functionary, scratching his
suspected our talk with the man about his biscuit. Let us begin the
"Well, this man has pointed out to me an individual who could serve us
gaiters. Special points: a brown, retriever, and the second incisor on
"Yes."
"Ten thousand thunders!" cried the general, letting his fist fall upon
miles. It will be lucky for us if you havent roused the whole
had not as yet made use of their arms. There was not a moment to lose.
I give you."
with a determined face and martial bearing, in full uniform, and

said a voice.
wives, your children massacred before your eyes, your harvests
lowered their heads and were silent; others made remarks to their
influence on the multitude.
then handed him over to a _gendarme_, saying:--

Jean Oullier, on his part, though his hands were bound, gave such a
They advanced in this way to about sixty feet from the inn. Here the
"Theres your man," he said, flinging Jean Oullier to him, as if the
"I did, general. I was bound to go to your rescue."
A second discharge of musketry proved that the militia and the

its head on his knees and licking his hand, as if to remind the

few have been made since 1832, that is, since the period of which we
long detour, in fact, as far round as Légé; thence along the road from
miles.
little troop, in the midst of which he had placed Jean Oullier.
confer with the princess, and it was likely that they would not have

"How can you?"

The order was instantly obeyed, but nothing was found on the old
Jean Oullier raised his voice as he said the last words.
and was, moreover, tired with its double burden. The general picked
they advanced, the thicker grew the bushes and the coverts beside the
"At any rate," said the one to the left, "he has got him on his back.
At the first note the rider quivered. Then, as the other troopers were
Thomas Tinguy sighed again.
is your sister now, having no home? At the château de Souday. Ah!
unknown country.


Eighty grenadiers, the two lieutenants, the prisoner and his three
"Yet it was certainly from here," said the general, as if speaking to

"It is very simple," he said; "the men who have just murdered our
made to feel, to our cost, that we have not been inhuman enough. Fool

"Then you know the river?"
they would have heard the guide and killed him or captured him before
here, especially in wet clothes."

Forty men and one lieutenant came over with the water up to their
sweat, and made the sign of the cross. At this moment the three riders

how it is possible for a man to swim with his hands bound in front of
be tempting God, not luck. He plunged again, and finding foothold
because the game was a man.

the direction of the current he jumped into the river.
it float on the surface of the water, giving it a strong push into the
swimming after it, moaning and whining as if distressed that his
wild ravine through which the Boulogne flows, while the rocks, echoing
Three or four more shots were now fired, and the balls ricochetted
fell over on his rider with a ball through his chest.
Souday is on the road to Machecoul, and we cant rest our men short of
to guide us through the forest."
he--turned instantly in the direction of the moans. The nearer he
fluid. He raised it to his face and smelt the fetid odor of blood. He
who killed you, my poor dog!"
were brothers. The elder was named Joseph, the younger Pascal Picaut.
instinctively foreseeing the military genius of the leader of the


listening every twenty steps or so, with the utmost attention.
field, about fifty yards off, was the high-road. On this road a sentry
men accustomed to use their faculties at night soon acquire, they saw
not make war in a way to suit him, none of them resembling Souchu, the
buildings of the patriots, which he burned. After one or two
band. A few days later he fell into a snare. He was caught, together
This commandant, a major of dragoons, took an interest in the poor
Joseph, issuing from the galleys, returned to the family cottage more
but continued to live on in the house their father had left them,
husband she would not live any longer with galley-slaves, for she did
brothers family and walling up the door of communication.
uncle had returned; but hardly had he put his rosy little face into

Joseph advanced slowly, without uttering a word to his brothers wife,

yours, that hed take the bread out of his own mouth to give it to
"Who has guided the Blues?"

"You lie."

wouldnt believe that story when I read it in the Bible!"
the fields, and took the direction of the forest of Machecoul, the

body, I swear to have no peace nor rest until those murderers have
who dies for his country, but to avenge him."
"Then I will guide you," said the widow, unhooking her husbands gun,

think. His reflections were serious.

resolution to conquer, at the cost of a thousand dangers, the heart of
end of the line, and put the whole beside the window. Then he went to
any other.
instead of following the road, which would have delayed him several
The position was a frightful one for the young baron. The man put a
"Jean Oullier!" cried the other, with such joy that he raised himself
"How many guns?"

"Yes; but--you?"
"Jean Oullier! Jean Oullier!"


second floor, and I could not get out till to-night through the
one of the Michel family.

Monsieur Jean Oullier!"
"Of course they will. I chose the farthest place to windward to make
"Yes. They have probably waked up Pascal Picaut, who will guide them.
"Poor Pascal!" said Jean Oullier.
consequences of the terrible struggle which is the natural outcome of


the bog. "Only, they must--"
were all collected.
to deliver me, and who succeeded. Come, to begin with, help me to drag
say, when I shout Fire!--fire instantly. If the soldiers turn to

So saying, Jean Oullier again went up the ascent, which he had partly
had hardly taken his place among his comrades when the two leading
from their saddles, and seeing, of course, nothing of the man beneath
Seizing the widow by the arm, he spurred his horse into the bushes.

"Forward!" he cried; "dont lose time answering them. Forward!
turn them back, but we have not done it. It looks to me as if they
advice is not to be despised."
rocks, and gliding so gently under the bushes that they scarcely


to reply.

my brethren uselessly shed. As for my relation to my masters I have
He started as if to go. No one stirred; no one even answered him.
his errand."
and more denuded of vegetation were the slopes. On this side the
into his hands, and yet Jean Oullier, by a sort of presentiment, was
stone which surrounded the flat summit.

imprecations. He turned round and looked behind him, thinking that
Jean Oullier leaned forward once more. The soldiers had crossed the
The ball was fired into space.
At that instant he heard shots from the gorse and saw through his
and whirling as he fell through it, and feel the jagged points of

itself in monosyllables of such vehemence that Bertha and Mary,
regularly concluded his evenings. The joys of trumps and odd tricks

marquis, who could not comprehend why all France should not be ready
who has jumped into epaulets, some talker who cant fire anything but

graceful salutation. The old _émigré_ was not very much deceived by
be."

naturally place them, and also, because it is there I should like to
monsieur, who, as I see, are one of us--"


their behalf, as becomes a loyal gentleman."
"Who are you?" he said, giving way to his astonishment. "By what right
because I see plainly that it is much the same as yours."
"My reasons are these: The soldiers were at that time quartered in the
opponents to-night I never thought of that. But," he continued, "that
has gone off, as some one," he added, with a half-angry look at his
words of acquiescence.

and for outposts or picket-guards M. de Soudays cook had surrounded
that you honor the board of a poor country gentleman."
"Thats a point I have often heard King Louis XVIII. and the Marquis
offer dish after dish to his younger guest. Petit-Pierre refused all,
Bonneville will have the kindness to take a few spoonfuls from my
too profound for the female mind, I should almost doubt your sex."
it youll always find him in the front rank."

condescend to gunning, and bring home, not ortolans, but larks and
cutlets on a gridiron."
would think you had seen the good King Louis XVIII. performing all
which looked so youthful at first sight showed, on closer examination,
there, Petit-Pierre, instead of remaining with the two young girls and
saluted every one present, and left the room.
"An order shall be given to those who resist an invitation."
rode at full speed past the windows and through the great gates to the

recognize the personages who concealed their identity under these
see whoever rapped, and so admit none until assured of the visitors
gesture.
arrive, and thats a good omen."
knowing the impatience of Petit-Pierre, who, though he remained in his
exactly as if she heard it."

"It is a delay, monsieur," he said; "that is all. You may be sure that
are they not?"
"You are from the South, monsieur," he said, "though you have not the
"You forget enthusiasm, monsieur," said Petit-Pierre.
they have by this time sent those men back to their homes, all the
Possibly a riot in Paris, combined with a defection in the army, may


news from France, he had received her last instructions in return. It


the military sub-division were both there."
He will be night and day in the saddle, and not leave us an instants
Leaguers,--The barrel smells of the herring."
Dermoncourt she would have full opportunity to recognize his



"His voice?--whose voice?" said the marquis.


"Yes, yes," gasped Michel. "I saw them there; they have torches. A

"I say that nothing is ready; we are not prepared to fight. Are we,
castle, marquis? We have no time to lose; the last shots we heard at
where that will be."
down the steps to the vault behind Bonneville and Pascal, who lighted

the inspection, returned to the salon.
not follow those whom his devotion had saved. Then she smiled; for
"Oh! oh!" exclaimed the marquis; "whom have we here, Id like to
Souday saw nothing but the enormous dome of a blue cotton umbrella,
"Ready to offer you his little services if you think him worthy,"
he exercised it in remaining behind his visitor, would have been
knowledge was once attained it was observable that the eyes were
become servility; he did not bow, he prostrated himself; and, like the
himself." His little gray eye flamed when he heard the name of a
The Marquis de Souday always welcomed Maître Loriot, partly on account
The notary bowed to the ground.
what I already knew of a riot at Montaigu. I feared, if I went any

little gray eye of the notary. He was about to speak when Monsieur de
anxious. Her son got out of a window on the second story at the risk
you know, girls?" asked the marquis, turning to his daughters.
seen of him."
contract between Baron Michel de la Logerie and the daughter of the
"I am not afraid," replied Loriot; "Monsieur le marquis may believe
inanition, youll certainly die of starvation outright if you pass a
of M. le Duc dOrléans are loaded with ball, you know."

                                XXXII.

it is half-past ten. I was just wondering if some accident could have
visit when I think what trouble and fatigue it has caused you."
"It is useless, my dear captain," replied the general; "the marquis
"How shall I thank you for all your considerateness?" said the
to see if supper, which has long been waiting for these gentlemen,
"Ah! it was an imp who told you?"


Michel. He had made up his mind that, so far as he was concerned, the
well knew the facility and rapidity with which news is communicated
toast may be as difficult for you as for us; but there is one that

"A sister?"

as for their father, rose a few moments later and followed them.
bending almost double, and rubbing his hands.
powerful reasons to treat as old friends, and even better than some


that she had the most to pardon,--"I forgive you; and in order that
What are these men now doing with the viands and wines of all
"Oh, mademoiselle--"

what I said to your father, really I do not know whether, in spite of

make such use of it that there would soon be no name in the whole
regard of her who advised the sacrifice?"
within the last few days; every word her sister said echoed painfully
Mary was accustomed to obey, and she obeyed. Of the two sisters, she

"Two hours ago--after Mademoiselle Bertha returned from the chapel,

many men about that I dont like to be alone, and I should die of
sometimes hunted among the rocks in the forest of Machecoul.
preceding Rosine whose basket hindered her, she continued her
purpose of ripening and drying them. Unfortunately, these botanic
prickly sofa. When Guérin threw him down into the brook a goodly
him to go frankly to the marquis and ask for hospitality,--a desire



seat on the oats, and found it a very enjoyable thing to eat the food
"Because your father awes me."
the education she had received were unusual; and with that faculty of

coming with all those officers."


"No; but Paris is far from Souday, and the baroness wants to take me
"You must not tell him, Mademoiselle Mary," said Michel, ashamed of
return to La Logerie."


"Very true; but thats not what I want of you."
"Without telling the marquis?"

          WHICH ENDS QUITE OTHERWISE THAN AS MARY EXPECTED.
His head was resting on his hand and his elbow on his knee. He was
with all his seeking he found no better way than the simple means of



timid, feeble child, which, alas! I am, is but a paltry thing at best;
for me."
Logerie toward her family, even the delusions Bertha cherished of
apparition that she pushed away the young man, whose hand had not left


For all answer Mary threw herself on her sisters neck, and in spite
"Bertha! Bertha!"

courage; and yet, in spite of all, I love him! I loved him the first
her arms.

did he speak to you of love?"
breaking heart.

him." She laid her hand on her sisters shoulder. "Swear it by our
But, half-way down, Mary made an excuse to go to her room. There she
he welcomed Bertha as a battalion formed in a hollow square and
"You will tell my mother, monsieur, that a man of principle finds
to his guests to return to the salon. They left the table in that
glasses, was preparing to resume a very interesting controversy as to
under a shower of shot and shell, leading his division to the assault
general, youve come just in time," he cried; "two minutes more, and
third in penury, and this little cot with its thin mattress seems to




"Passionately."


than a journey round the world; you know when they begin, but nobody

"No joking," said the general, becoming serious. "If I listened to my
"Pooh! do you suppose I cant find excuses enough? A senile old man,
soldiers after all."
"The fox man--"

"Oh, theres no danger of that; once warned, Ill answer for him."
"Yes."


and a true dark-blue is a fast color."
those neighbors assemble for a conference in which an uprising and
The marquis bounded in his bed. The general was better informed than

of the persons who accompanied her. Then, your guests having gone down

"Well, when you see the print of a young boars paw sharply defined in

even the marquis.
not mistaken. All I want to do is to prove to you, as a matter of

"Because if you had known the rank and quality of your guests you
and others, who had judged it best not to wait for our arrival."

the leash, that is nothing more than a vague indication, is it? And
the scene,--steps, too, of persons who were not walking, but running





Monsieur de Bonneville, I presume, took his companion on his back. The
council?"
"Certainly; I am here to answer questions."
"If I answer it, what?"

you may do, or rather, whatever you may have done, I shall keep my
been for the last month in the midst of her, in the midst of the
stunted; and on both sides, too. Yes, my God! with us as well as with
let us speak of that. You had no friends in our ranks, we had none in
side of the big battalions, the best exchequer. And that is why I say
is no longer of the measure of her soul. The times have changed,
"I will not go to England," said the old man, firmly.
and hire a little cottage somewhere in England,--well, Im not rich, I

thank you for your hospitality."
window, and as he did so he heard a slight scratching on a little door
coarse paper folded into the shape of a letter. M. de Souday opened
"Young ladies! girls!" cried the marquis; "you are in it! You are to
marquis, to be so very kind as to grant me your beautiful and charming
Mary was silent and motionless. Bertha left the room, and returned in


---------------
make a rampart of our bodies for him."
Petit-Pierre, who had hitherto held his place silently in the midst of
knows the country well, can easily find it for me."
Come, it is time to shake hands and part."
please. Your Highness must--"
approached, and Petit-Pierre mounted astride his shoulders.
apprenticeship at Chouannerie, do tell me why I am perched on your

my foot was not as large as that of Madame la Duchesse de ----"
The young man bore to the left, attracted by the sound of a brook.
he fought in La Vendée in the days when Charette, almost
continue his way along one or the other bank of the little stream.
one of those paths called "lines," which are cut parallel to each




"No."
"The devil!"



from the bushes, and a shadow rose before him; it was Bonneville.
out and neighed."

turned to the right and plunged into the thicket. At the end of ten
"Now," he said, "my poor Petit-Pierre, you must resign yourself and go
Bonneville stopped and wiped his brow.

"I hope so."
Petit-Pierre sprang off at once, not to save himself, but to lighten
had all along marked the horizon came nearer and increased in height.
"Pooh!" said the count; "my strength doesnt come from my stomach."
"Bonneville, call the usher and let him notify the chamberlain on duty






understand his last words.

"Now for Benaste, and fast, too!"
Petit-Pierre could barely keep up with him; and from time to time she
"The matter is that I am a wretched man," said Bonneville. "I relied
"When we left the water I landed on the side we had just left, and in
"What is worse?"
"That we must try to get to the nearest farmhouse before daylight."

The duchess rose with an effort, for during the last few moments she
Well, if you wont march at the common step you shall be made to
along. The words that Gaspard had said to him as they left the vaults
legs would only obey him mechanically; the blood seemed to settle on

give the owls cry of the Chouans; but his breath failed him, and he

Bonneville."
"Down _there?_" cried Jean Oullier.
Jean Oullier mounted the hedge-bank as easily as though he were only
dead. Hearing the door open, she rose and turned round.
"Widow Pascal, will you avenge your husband and make your fortune at
you, avenge your husband and make your fortune by that act."
"Madame, put back your own fair hair behind your wig; it made me guess
understand.
"A death," replied one of the men, with the laconic brevity of a
meant either an insult or a threat,--two things which affected Courtin

As he spoke the peasant turned aside and, fixing his eyes on Courtin,
As he finished speaking the man, apparently thinking he had exchanged

Joseph, sitting on a horse-collar, was smoking his pipe before the



"I am not lying," stammered the man.
the government would rid us once for all of these fomenters of
"Thank you; but I dont want you to meddle in that, Monsieur Courtin,"
be a good walker, if she did that distance so quickly."
The young peasant-woman now thought it time to come to the help of the
Courtin listened.
children, and that the garret was common to all; but the widow did not
all, that the widow of Pascal Picaut is not among them. Go, and leave
pocket-inkstand, which had, no doubt, been used to write the order
time will prove it to you."
twist your spindle or turn your wheel as best you can, and youll

remedied was a perfectly natural one, he mounted his steed with an

widow. "Theres an honest man, and a faithful one."
"May it not rather fall, if God is just, on the heads of those who
"No," said the widow, "it is not because the man who for fifteen years
tortured have not the right to turn upon their bed of suffering unless
"Then why not deliver me up to them, if such are really your
And with a rapid, sudden movement, like all she made, she pulled away
as she fell on her knees and raised her arms to heaven; "if we are
"What is the matter?" cried Bonnevilles voice.
replied.
"By whom? There is no one here."
"Jean Oullier has provided some one, and I have sent my nephew on to
"Some one is running in," cried Marianne Picaut, rushing from the
"Wait for them," said the young peasant-woman.
sister-in-law, who was known to be a Blue, may have seemed to him a
"Lower your gun!" she cried to the Vendéan, in a tone that seemed not

"But I dont mean to hide myself. No one will recognize me in these
mattress on which the body lay, and hid the clothes and shirt and


Seating herself quietly in the corner of the fireplace, she took her

pity to torment her at such a time."
The soldiers spread themselves through the house to execute these

While the soldiers continued their exploration the lieutenant stood
"It has happened that the men are up there in the very loft you

spite of his companions remonstrances, he left his hiding-place to
"Yes," replied Joseph Picaut.

V. we leave alive, the better. Never will I surrender, I tell you
While, therefore, Bonneville opened the trap-door, he himself undid
"Vive Henri V!"
"Yes," said Marianne, in a voice choking with emotion.

mine, is he not?" and she stretched her arm over the body of the young
first two victims of the last insurrection of La Vendée.
household of the Marquis de Souday.
of his legitimist opinions, thought it judicious not to manifest them
and her gray felt hat, with its white feathers, lent itself
costume,--for he did not doubt the sisters would make the campaign
to take it, she merely looked at the garments with a pallid smile and
At every step she made under the empire of these feelings, Mary felt


"Ah! my sweet little Mary," he said, as if she were still ten years

coming struggle but victory, a young heart like yours doesnt go out
"Yes, if you can."
wound.

would break,--"supposing all that is so, where is the harm?"
is out of temper with me to-day, all about that young fellow, too."
he answered me when I asked him if that young Monsieur Michel was
"Take care of what?"
Marys heart was wrung in her bosom.

room.
crime. Come, speak out, Jean; I am fully disposed to be kind and
"Well, what have you to say about him, Jean? My father is delighted to
"Go on; finish what you mean to say."
The Vendéan frowned.

himself so brave and so devoted that calumny will not dare to meddle
my hopes and fears. Yes, Jean, all concealments, all constraints are

"Because Jean Oullier, poor and of no account as he may be, will never
if you say another word, if you utter another insult against my
in doing so,--yes, you, Jean Oullier,--for I repeat, I love him, and
Jean Oullier shook his head sadly.


anxious to get away from the young girl than to obey the call of the




"Because you run too great a risk in going over there."
"Well, havent you Monsieur Michel?" said Jean Oullier, in a sarcastic
accepted by her father, his face became radiant. Bertha herself was
those so dear to us."
"I mean to stay as I am."
the Picaut house, mademoiselle; but you have not told me what to do in
Michel knew every oak and every tree on that road.
passable."
"Ah! did you hear what I said?"


came over her.
"Pascals."


considerable agglomeration of woodland. The result has been that in
their impenetrable undergrowth of holly and ferns which grew under the
one who had stood concealed behind one of the huge centennial beeches
He was clothed in the sordid rags of an old jacket and the semblance

pair of steel limbs, which resisted all fatigue, feared no task, and
which had survived the collapse of his brain. He made it his glory.



into Aubins good graces; do you know that? Why, you are almost a man,
roasted; but you know how such fellows grumble."
gray cloth, cut in a shape that was almost modern compared with those
men--oftener alone and isolated--he had managed to make head against
opening, and gave a curiously modulated whistle. At this signal a hum

but it gives me pleasure to have you take the trouble to come and warn

"Thats not long."


"I should like to be sure whether you do or not."
"Jean Oullier! Ah! anything that comes from him is welcome. He is a
"Well, what does he want?"

then you can tell him what you have seen."
at least, his orders shall never be obeyed. So much for the _orders_
lords who make all the noise and leave us to do the work."
to-night, and have the whole neighborhood watched, more especially the
end turned toward Touvois."




by the barrel, and struck a vigorous blow with the butt-end on
"Yes; dont speak of it!"
Jacques, "it is time for my round of inspection, and I shall have to
_gars_ Aubin; and while you are waiting, take a bite. I see them
with the character of the landscape. Two Bretons, lying on their
long-drawn-out way which indicated danger. Courte-Joie whistled softly
                                 XLV.
had shared with her. The royal cause had only lost one soldier, yet


"Right!" said Petit-Pierre; "the last half of your prayer will be
surrounding the château de Souday to you; second, that you have come
"Stop, stop! what are you saying? _Your Highness!_ There is no
Michel stammered a few words, which did not reach the ears of his

"Ah!" she said; "theres a sigh which tells me many things about the
to my sympathy! _Ventre-saint-gris!_ as Henri IV. would have said;
"And I will further wager that she is neither more nor less than one
can help you at any time you have only to call upon him; he will be
"No, not at all. Only, I am well known in the neighborhood, and if I
"Whos there?" called Michel, making his voice gruff.
tone, which made his companion aware of the urgency of the situation,
"No, I couldnt make a trade. These damned politics hinder business,
circuit."
"Who told you that, Courtin?" said Michel, man[oe]uvring his horse so
bayonets. Do a wiser thing than that, Monsieur Michel."



mysterious personage whom his young master had behind him.

hardly gone a dozen paces before the saddle turned, and both riders


"What is it?"

upon his flesh, began to rear and plunge. The young baron now began to
horse still resounded on the stony road.

their course."
converge toward the firing. We may fall in with one of their

"I distrust that adverb in France. My poor Bonneville said he knew the
valley of the Benaste from end to end, rises toward the south and
"We have still to cross the forest," he said; "but we shall get there
of you, my young guide; and faith, it shall not be Petit-Pierres
wore, crying out in a voice of thunder:--
seized Michel from behind.
"But I wish to know where you are taking us," insisted Petit-Pierre.
and his bandits. For it was he, bent on sacredly keeping his oath to
                           THE LAST VENDÉE;

suffice, one of them went down into the burrow, lighted two bits of
pursuits,--that is to say, to their psalm-singing, their games, their
suffer much pain?"
"How kind you are, Ma--Petit-Pierre! And whatever you order me to do,
"Do Chouans stop inoffensive travellers? Impossible!"
danger from my own partisans! But hush!"
him fall at full length on the ground.
the forest of Touvois at this time of night?"

"Yes. What is going on over there, Monsieur le baron?"
"Well," continued Michel, "we met what everybody meets at all hours
affairs that were none of ours."
attention, while one of his men threw the light of a torch full on her
his Majesty Louis-Philippe."
le baron; and take your share, my excellent young friend,--master and
uprising that is now taking place. Dont you think so, Monsieur le
"Go on," said Michel.
provide you with a way to manifest that devotion in a dazzling

"Come, thats good!" exclaimed Maître Jacques, not a little amazed at
Monsieur le baron."
pocket. But Petit-Pierre stepped forward.

"You take an extraordinary interest in the affairs of his Majesty, my
"You require?--you order? Ah, _ça!_ my little turtle-dove, you talk
friend than he. That was queer enough; but this--oh! this is queerer
"I assure you--began Petit-Pierre.
"Let no one dare to lay a hand on me!" said Petit-Pierre. Then, as

The situation was getting critical; and heres a poor lad who will owe
have made him to speak to your father in his behalf."
Then, turning away, as if such persons no longer existed for her, she
enough to give us a guide to Banl[oe]uvre, Bertha, let us start; for,
sentences of the old school.
more. While the marquis ceremoniously prepared to place Berthas hand

and sensual lips, like those which commonly belong to imaginative

bestowed the unambitious name of "cabriolet," began to rattle over the
As for the coachman, not being trusted with the secrets of the affair,
The traveller entered the common room, which happened at the moment to


The master of the house then gave the stranger one of those uneasy,
"In order?"


led horse was intended for his riding, the farm-hand for his guide. In
exchanged between the traveller and his guide, they reached the gate
"Monsieur spent last night at a rendezvous, and has been nearly all

no doubt the person whom Petit-Pierre expects from Paris?"
and drink a bottle of wine with Louis. Ill be back in two hours.

his house by the back-door, and if there were any meeting or

Three hundred steps farther on the two royalists found their forward
impossible to make the horses mount either of them, and there was no
left of the horsemen. By continuing in this way they would pass within


"Let him follow me."
The traveller was beginning to get accustomed to these curt,
The traveller answered by a simple motion of the head, which meant,
He quivered. The voice was really that of Jean Oullier, but the old
words that a man had escaped him.
Maître Marc crossed the highway rapidly and disappeared through the


lighted her own face at the same time. The traveller looked admiringly

room, lying on a bedstead of common pine roughly put together, he saw
The princess wore on her head one of those woollen _coifs_ distinctive

"Pray believe, Madame," said Maître Marc, "I entreat you to believe in


thought, By token of this flag we conquer. The white flag is the

dead."

be suspected of cultivating paradox."

it. Well, all such persons take a false view of facts; they cannot

"It is because I am convinced there is the stuff of twenty kings in
"I should lose time in making it out," said the duchess; "read it to
not connected with the police, who would consent to make a riot in the
glory of doing a grand and courageous deed and of preventing the
the reader in any way, but it was evident that her calm preceded a
certain expressions in the letter he shares the sentiment that

popular sovereignty,--two things which howl and rend each other when
his teeth and claws, and will suffer him to come nearer only for the
all our efforts could."
"Your friends will not be able to make you that reproach, Madame, for
"The maréchal?"
"It is, on the contrary, to secure, at a later period, your sons
"Oh, noble land of Vendée!" cried the duchess; "could I have believed
XVI. in 1792, or Louis XVIII. in 1813, but he can be made the means of
"God guard your Highness!" said the messenger, believing it was
            PETIT-PIERRE RESOLVES ON KEEPING A BRAVE HEART
sparkled in the shadow of the dull, brown masses about it. The rest of
through this partition, in which were sliding panels, the cows poked
Jean Oullier, who, on his side, had subjects for thought and anxiety,
"I am afraid it may annoy you."
"What is the matter, my dear Jean Oullier?" she asked. "Why do you
life, been willing to help on."
have any secrets from me. Though I am not the Holy Father himself, you
"Yes, I was ignorant of that," said Jean Oullier.
Petit-Pierre interrupted him.

Jean Oullier shook his head.
until time, until the sight of the happiness the son of your enemy
"Permit me, my dear Jean Oullier," she said, "to doubt your
enters it, I will none the less pray God, night and morning, to

"You will soon know. We have talked of your interests, Jean Oullier,
Then she fell on her knees, and clasping her hands, prayed to God, the
entered the room. Seeing Petit-Pierre on her knees, absorbed in prayer
"A truce to compliments, my friend," interrupted Petit-Pierre. "That


"Various royalist committees that I need not name to you, but whose

who deposed King Charles X. are held at arms length by the present
that this retreat, which would impeach your own political sagacity and
think we can muster at this moment?"
your perils and your fate."
to hide their tears. The Marquis de Souday walked about the room with
"Who said that?" asked Petit-Pierre, eagerly, rising on the tips of
not leave us!"

least leave traces on the memory of nations. Who would remember the
out of the country, persecutions will begin; and they will be the more
the people is the voice of God. I have faith in that of Jean Oullier."

Marquis de Souday, find me pen, ink, and paper in this farmhouse where
MY DEAR MARÉCHAL,--I remain among you. Be so good as to come to me.
"Thursday, May 31," said the marquis, thinking that the nearest time

                                   Regent of France.
"Alas!" said Gaspard; "God grant that luckless counter-order may reach
"I will go," said Bertha, who had heard, in the alcove where she was
"Stay, my dear Bertha; I have something to say to you about Baron
We have mentioned already, incidentally, that Michel had left the
affection that was dearer to him than life itself. There was not in

only do timid persons dread being made to suffer, but they also dread
now intent on putting into execution. He went down to the yard of the
"No," replied the baron, for he fancied that the Vendéans eye could

the farmyard. There he had leisure to continue his meditations; but
their food; the sheep, impatient for the fields, bleated and poked
spectacle the dawn presented to her. Any eye--above all, that of a

"He spoke; did you hear what he said?"

"No," said Jean Oullier, curtly; "the lesson I got at Montaigu has
"But--" said Michel.
young man.
say--true shame withheld him, and he at last departed, without very
him,--having, as we may say, changed masters by abandoning his mother
and impotent desires.
Nantes.
certainty of the grandeur and generosity of your soul, but, above all,
sent with it; the danger was too great either for a faithful
start on his way back to the Retz region.
horses, mules, peasants, and peasant-women, all carrying in baskets,
the crowd by the stopping and turning of his horse raised such a storm
had some object not foreign to the political and commercial interests
He went close up to the pair as he gave them alms, and the alms
hay-carts and cabbage-carts, but finally he was forced to resign
Château he saw, not twenty steps distant from him, the identical
strategic movement assured him he was not mistaken.
at that moment from his body. Then he turned round. The notary,
shant be remarked upon." Passing his handkerchief over his face,
right; call it philosophy. I ought to tell you that this same news,
"You know what you are to her, Monsieur Michel; you cant have

Michel gazed anxiously at the windows of the house into which Mary had
"My dear Monsieur Loriot," said Michel, who at a safe distance from

now I must say good-bye; I leave Nantes at eleven oclock."
Bertha."
every cigar that comes along puts me into a fever. Well, good-bye;
Presently the gate of No. 17 opened, and the same young peasant-girl
to look round for Courte-Joie, Trigaud, and his horse, all three had
seen impelled him far more than the remonstrances of the notary.




is to say, the branch of a tree squared at one end, and now
young man he had seen with Mary; then, after the violence of his
these two villages and a stones throw from the high-road between
vast hall and a barn. The hall, over the cellar in which Michel was
sun and a splendid view of the lake of Grand-Lieu in the distance, the
"Goodness!" cried one of the men, suddenly, "whats that I see down

here come the men straight toward us."


"You were right, corporal; he has got another man perched on his

garrison. Scamps! Ill bet if we searched their pockets wed find
his nasal whine, which formed the treble to his partners bass.
and your company as best we can."
a fragment of the old battlement half-buried in nettles, which lay

he put them down, Pinguet arrived with a gun on each shoulder.

little hay and a corner in the stable to lie on?"

hand."

into tears; I declare if his eyes werent two faucets!"
nature of the difficulty; then with a large flat stone which he picked
rations of a general, or indeed of the king of France, which would be
millstone the large flat stone he held in his hand, placing it in such
down thunders of applause from the delighted audience.
might give us a song, if only to pay your scot."
Saint-Colombin."

"Villain!" he cried, "Ill teach you to come here in our midst and
"You asked me for a song; I warned you that the songs I knew were not
let us lock them up incontinently."
night, well see about letting you out to-morrow morning."
Come, off with you, friend, and quick too!"
the giant walked peacefully along toward the door of the dungeon,

The corporal and four soldiers came out of the guard-room to inspect
draw?"
horse, with as much success as he had won when exhibiting his prowess
which disturbed their equilibrium, the cart swayed over to left and
evident the good God doesnt mean me to keep on,--mustnt go against
"Good luck to you, then! As for me, Ill put the horse back where I
the millstone, which he then, as softly, turned over upon it. Then he
as capacious as the hand itself, but Aubin Courte-Joie stopped him.
hole. But, dont you see, I wanted your help; I could never have


sufficient.
"Be so good as to follow us, and in less than an hour you will find
distance of some seven or eight hundred yards, half suspended in space
"Ill-treatment! Ha! dont you say that, or Ill appeal to your honor
"she-wolf" who awaited him, and, painful as the interview would be, he
"You wont try to get away?"
bordered the road he heard the whinnying of a horse.

Michel took care not to say what was filling his mind to the exclusion
Bertha from Tinguys cottage. A minute more and they were making their
awaiting him by the sight of her young maid.
"There are no soldiers there; it is only Jean Oullier, who has spent
garret to put him in; and thats easy enough to do, for he is not hard
forcing the virtue of a girl than the bolts of a prison. Besides, what





"Are you really going to take me to her?" cried Michel, beside himself


"What was that errand, Rosine?" asked Michel, before whose eyes the
"Yes, a letter Monsieur Loriot gave her as we came along."

the animal to a pace in keeping with the pulses of his heart.
of Grand-Lieu in a moment."
horizon still, but the mists were roseate as he began to descend the

Michel would gladly have flung himself into the sea to precede the
"She is probably in the duck-shooters hut," replied the girl, pulling
Whatever his hopes might be, Michels heart beat almost to bursting

breast heaved, her fingers trembled, and the tears the young baron

poor lad had not enough experience of the human heart to observe that
"Dont talk so, naughty child that you are!" said Mary, striving to
you wish to be loved, as you deserve to be loved;" said the poor
fortunate that I did so."


be yours and love the woman who loves you and to whom you are
love."
necessary, I will go away for a time that you may cure yourself."
it,--is greater than you suppose; her tenderness will satisfy the
a vine which the gardener trains as he will? No, no; I tell you again,
to you the happiness of my sister, and all my life shall be spent in
happiness of two poor orphans."
life were taken from it. You see, therefore, that it is impossible I
your sister shall ever see me again."
"Michel," she murmured, "if you love me as you say you do, you will
"I could have courage for all, except renouncing you; but the simple
nervous arms and said in a sobbing voice:--
"Then you love me, Mary?" said the young man.
Saying these words in spite of herself, and as if attracted by

She passed her hands over her forehead and eyes to efface, if

was emotional before she left him, he merely held out his hand and
"What!" cried Michel, wringing his hands, "are you still thinking of
"No; but she told me that she loved you. I received her confidence as
"Yes. God will give us strength, Michel,--the God whom we invoke. Let
hear conversations in which the past disguised nothing of its
sufferings, increased by each seeing that of the other, end by cursing
above. If on contrary, you refuse me, Michel, if your heart cannot
you an eternal farewell."
Mary, and I will obey you."
"Oh, my God, my God!" cried Michel, wringing his hands; "is it all

"Remember, Michel, that Bertha loves you, that she cherishes every
Michel understood the difference, and it wrung his heart. Tears sprang
from the eyes of the old follower of Charette?
love."
Michel said it so simply that it was evidently the expression of his

                     THE LAST KNIGHTS OF ROYALTY.
issued from the forests of the Deux-Sèvres, to serve as kernel to the
of the young men forming the corps délite of the royalist forces.
besides that engagement (a serious one in its results) the peasantry,
arrested on returning to their homes.
Machecoul was so violent that it swept into its orbit all the
Mary, who had rejoined her father and sister two hours after leaving
appearance. The change would certainly have struck every one about her
place at the Jacquet mill in the district of Saint-Colombin. From
be proud of finding such loyalty, such courage, among friends, and
of their struggle; they advanced without hope to certain death.
twenty. In his feverish impatience it seemed to him that the sun of



capricious,--they never go to those who call them."
as you havent the nerve to face that foolish Bertha, and speak the
"Easily. As you cannot be the husband of the woman you love, you must
goes by the name of Bertha, nor of what she is capable, I dont

"Ah! I would rather you talked to me of death."
desertion."
"Good! in three hours we start."

The young baron remained for several minutes in a state of utter
old Vendéan in refusing him the consolation of a last farewell seemed
plank on a paddle of the wheel and managed, by resting his body
"Yes, I."

consented to conceal my own."
hear? Some one is coming! Go, Michel; go, go!"

fell flat upon the floor. Then Bertha, springing over her sisters
"That is singular!" she said.

matters worse. Oh," she muttered, "this love is making me beside
longer."

all the more eager because of her sudden change of feeling. She
that column, had gone without bidding her good-bye; and she returned,
through the land the whole population rose in a mass and ran to meet
insurgents had already fought an engagement with the regular army.
elevated hearts, who felt themselves bound by their fathers past, and
Légé and the division of the Marquis de Souday. This reinforcement
men of Nantes and the country gentlemen formed in column and prepared
garrison of Chêne.
begin all over again his early exploits in the great war, to be thus
took counsel together and decided among themselves to keep her as it
promises, threats, were all in vain against his strict fidelity to

this very moment."
"Oh, yes; I entreat you."
have given proofs of courage all my life!"
the leg of the hapless stool which remained in his hand, he cried
"Thats right!" interjected Petit-Pierre.

him on a chair, where he fainted.

"Alas!" said the man; "our _gars_, who were conquerors at first, are
"Yes, the women; even the old men, even the children."

renew, from time to time, his remonstrances; although, in the depths
running; and it was with great difficulty that the marquis stopped her
soldier, turned round at the shout and saw Petit-Pierre, Bertha, and
the exercise of that right; but to-day I have thought proper to do so.
advance your line of skirmishers and double their fire."
Gaspard vainly attempted to restrain her, and even caught her arm; but
first house was aiming at him.

The latter, whose resistance was becoming by this time more resolute,
As for Trigaud, his hands being free, for the cripple was strapped to
he had made in the forest of Touvois, he made a sign to his men, and
hitherto, for it laid the assailants on the ground in such serried


Courte-Joie near Bertha, sprang to one of the joists that supported
ear. The latter immediately, and in spite of the commands and
"Look for yourself," he replied, taking her to a rise in the ground
and she became, what she really was, a woman; she, who had so lately
better times,--advising them to disperse at once, and thus escape all
at Cherbourg!--I hoped I might never see their like again."
arm, who led her from the hilltop into the road across the plain. The
become of the Baron de la Logerie; probably he was frightened, and had
undeniable proof could have forced her to admit that she had made a
could throw some light upon the matter.


lad wounded, panting, abandoned, lying helpless on some lonely and

hastening her steps, rejoined Petit-Pierre and the Vendéans just as
another refuge, she knelt down and prayed to God that her sacrifice

The commanding officer of the battalion of the line had no sooner
assault; they came within twenty paces of the château, but were forced
besides, the flames were pouring upward, and they trusted that after
the ground-floor up to the first floor; the men obeyed; and while one
rather than an effort of defence. It seemed impossible for the little
Eight men stepped forward.
dead, and scattered over the meadows, which were then under water. The

Presently, however, he returned, carrying a man upon his back and
burning ruins.
pointing to the ruins; and before the two men could stop her, she
God you must resign yourself to it."
Courte-Joie shook his head.
for there is not one chance in a hundred that your lover and Jean
Besides, we havent time for it; the soldiers will return by daybreak,
daughter of the Marquis de Souday. If they dont shoot you, theyll
Courte-Joie, perceiving that nothing could be obtained of Bertha by
the mendicant and watched him. The movement he had made, the words he


"Listen!" said Bertha, triumphantly.
sounds of the labor of the buried men came to them distinctly.
they are not in the cellar, but in a sort of niche beyond it. The
to him.
                         THE MOOR OF BOUAIMÉ.
"They took refuge under the stairway; the ceiling fell before they had
knees and brought him to his senses, was now expressing to him all the


young baron, Bertha went up to him.
courage and constancy."
"Thats how things change in this world, Mademoiselle Bertha. I desire
Passing his hand through Michels well arm to support him, he gave the
when Trigaud showed his rider with some pride a sort of club he had


troop, lies about three miles from the village of Saint-Hilaire; the
the situation, he fell soundly asleep.
the sun was drawing from the earth began to assume to Trigauds eyes a
which, however, needed no commentary:--
the rest of the party. Courte-Joie therefore concluded that the wisest
spread over the moor to cut off his retreat in case he attempted to
Courte-Joie followed the direction of Trigauds finger and saw the
constrained his friend to abandon the concealment he was preserving
horizon; he wet a finger and lifted it to discover the direction of
latter stuck into bundles of dried herbage, which he placed at
must take."
"Take mademoiselles hand!" called Courte-Joie to Jean Oullier; "and
lose sight of Trigaud as head of the column."
To which she replied with an almost inarticulate yes. As for Michel,
tone of triumph.
and show them by a few shots where we are. After that, being free of
giving her with the man she loved.
the young Baron de la Logerie.
                          TO ITS PARTNERSHIP.
valley which was almost free of the smoke which so far had been their
soon, _gars_ Oullier."
gun. The man, struck in the breast, twirled round upon himself and
The Vendéan was right. The three comrades had scarcely advanced ten
knife, put it between his teeth, and continued his way with headlong
"Are you all right?" said Jean Oullier to Courte-Joie.
this misfortune, which destroyed the symmetry of the work at which he
"Yes," said Jean Oullier, "and give me time to reload. Meantime, do
Quick, quick, lazy-bones!" he added, addressing Trigaud.
"Oh," said Courte-Joie, "we shall not go on without you. Tell me,

"I might limp a dozen steps; but whats the good of that?"

officer was really dead, dashed down in pursuit of the Chouans at full
wound on the cripples arm.
rapidly approaching; a few horses-lengths alone separated them from
place; but Courte-Joie knew it was useless to even think of putting
nought but that which injured his companion,--and charged madly on the

the shock was so violent that it brought the giant to his knees. The
his head, he flung it hissing through the air as if from a catapult.
side, and covered with blood. A cry of horror and of vengeance burst
the blood that blurred it, while a torrent of tears--the first that
searching for a spot which promised him a union throughout eternity?
ever till they died upon the shore.

moment when hatred, rancor, vengeance of all kinds had put the country
herself to the peasants house.
After this came the fights at Chêne and La Pénissière. On the days of
Dermoncourt, fully occupied with the movement of his columns, and
but who, nevertheless, showed him the utmost civility and a
an invitation to dinner at the hôtel Saint-Pierre, which the stranger
Maître Courtins brain was evidently larded with _couleur-de-rose_
The mysterious unknown had no doubt dazzled his eyes with something
The position was uncomfortable, but Maître Courtin was careful not to

stretched out his eager, grasping, quivering hands to seize these

royalist officer."
another means. Give me your horse at once!"
Then, without allowing his questioner time to say more, the mayor of
"Monsieur Michel de la Logerie."

returned. But we waited, and waited, in vain! Jean Oullier is either
"Yes, they set fire to the heath."

the chance of escaping an immediate explanation.
"Good Lord!"
matter would settle itself.
afforded) into a sort of lean-to above his bedroom, where he installed


anguish.
who never came; for hours at a time she sat silently absorbed in her

own; whether she had the right to force the disposal of his love;
accustomed to seek, in view of a future life, the path of patient
courage and resolution to the level of the misfortune which
failing in his duty, had heroically contributed to, the defence of La
dark.
had a full nights rest; and no sooner had the daylight dawned
her to Paris, where she might be lost in the midst of a vast
Marys appearance had not, as may well be supposed, escaped her, and
Petit-Pierre was not accustomed, hurt her feet. She tried to keep on;




"I mean that you may pass for a peasant-girl in the eyes of gendarmes;



seemed to be one of life or death to her, were noticed with curiosity
his marriage!"

"Shall I tell you something that I think I have discovered?" he said.

"Monsieur Courtin, you will oblige me extremely," interrupted Mary,
go together, unless--If you are going to Nantes on an errand, and I
"Who told you that?" asked Mary.
"I dont know myself as yet," replied Mary. "I am to meet a man on the
"It does; your suppositions are offensive both to your master and to

the capture of Petit-Pierre was the real end and object of Courtins

The girl hesitated; she looked at the farmer; doubtless the expression

to the town, where Petit-Pierre was promised a safe retreat, the more
As they passed the Bouffai a hand was laid on Petit-Pierres shoulder.

to the house where she was expected. Petit-Pierre very justly remarked
Though it was next to impossible for the soldiers to discover Jean
continue a struggle in faith when the bravest despair. He commended

courage and force of will did not desert him for a single instant.
Night was coming on. Listen as he might, Jean Oullier could hear no
stumps of the brambles and the gorse, cut down in the haying season
caring whether enemies or friends came to his relief; but his voice
across the heather, and that step he knew to be a womans.
every pebble they displaced rolled to his heart; his agony from the
his soul to Him.
Tired of calling to her dog, and curious to know what excited it, the


"Good gracious! but see here, I was just carrying dinner to some men

"Thats a pretty idea of yours, Jean Oullier, to go and live among

"Thats no matter. Even if you could walk, Jean, Id be afraid to take

swelled to the size of a mans head, and his torn hands and face.
would detect him, she departed, exhorting him to patience.


bridge."
"Bloodhound?"
times."

"You are a fool."
can I be sure you wont slip off with the money when the government

"she-wolves."
tree, cocked one barrel, lifted the weapon to his shoulder, and fired.
to fire at a safe distance.
"Yes, it is at the top of the hill, for the horse is trotting. Come,
"How so?"

future. A few of them, who were openly compromised, followed the
between them and a stern government. The Marquis de Souday alone
insipid,--he reached a point at which he regretted the good, pleasant
them naturally the position of leaders; and yet he was so touched by
his subordinate--or rather his insubordinate--now became his
woman.
If it had not been for Courtin, who always came to his room as soon as
having, as we have heard him tell, got possession of Michels secret,
antecedents, was constantly talking to Michel of the great devotion of
Michels convalescence did not progress as rapidly as Courtin desired.
grew better and stronger, he urged him, whenever they were alone
Logerie to death.

corner,--a sort of closet or recess without a door,--where she might

          HER SONS INTERESTS, SERVES THOSE OF PETIT-PIERRE.

The baroness stopped, as if her mouth refused to utter the words.
"He has been simply a second providence. He found me wounded and dying
said his mother.
go to England," continued his mother. "You will leave this cursed land
heart conceived new hopes, and without saying a word of them to his


"Yes, mother," said the young man, rising, "I have given that love;

and the duty which he owes to her."

marriage!"

have never seen."
must come from a mothers heart. Michel pressed her tenderly to his

She was waiting the moment to throw herself into his arms. Michel
"Because nothing is less sure than our departure," he replied.
escape, my personal safety," said the young man.
thinking of that! Just now I loved you; now I admire you! Yes, yes,
If the room had been lighted Bertha must have seen the flush on
obey."
"But the Jeune Charles expects me, Bertha, and in all probability

Ten minutes later Michel was astride of Courtins pony, saddled and
In spite of the adornment of wind-galls and spavin, with which age and
servants at La Logerie welcomed his arrival, Michel rapped impatiently

"The South."
"I must have that horse taken back to its home."
various colors, thrown over their heads, there were three male
holy water; after following for about ten yards, he hastened his steps
church, and soon after, having entered a dark and narrow alley, the
Petit-Pierre, and seen again, gun in hand, before the fight at Chêne,

"Pardon me, monsieur; but no one can see the person of whom you speak,
"It really seems as though Providence had sent you. It is
"The Point du Jour."

singly to the tavern of the Point du Jour. Ask them to give you a room
the quay. When he reached the tavern of the Point du Jour he found
"I dont say it isnt," said the peasant, with a sly look.

inquiries.

"I think not; unless he recognized Joseph Picaut just as Picaut
shall be made to hold his tongue. I have old scores against him which
the stable; he would certainly recognize it, inasmuch as it is his own
wrecks, you will see a vessel called the Jeune Charles. Though at
to-night."


had answered so well that he now resolved to be equally firm with
not, of course, be Petit-Pierre, or Mary, for it was not to be


"Your brother! I, Mary?" said the young man, shaking his head. "As for
only--of you alone! Bertha is my sister, Mary; you are my beloved, my
again!"
risk his head for you! Why should I care, otherwise, for these

Bertha! let us suppose it for a moment; why, there could be no greater
"No, Bertha will not die of it," said the voice of Petit-Pierre, who

those you love; and you have given me the right to place myself among

Thanks to the moonlight, they could see the river from time to time,
easy. He felt sure that, as he received no answer, the Chouan would
deliver up the person passing under the name of Petit-Pierre tempted

dare not act by myself."




"I fear there is some horrible machination under all this."
hour it would be daylight. There was no time to lose. Michel and Mary
"Pooh! all roads are safe if you follow them cautiously; besides, what
the tender words her lover said to her. For this reason, perhaps, he

forget it, I dont; and as you and I are running the same danger, you
In ten minutes the house will be surrounded; we must make for the
the poor lad has fully earned it. There! Now go your way, Monsieur de
Rousseau.
Michels departure would, of course, upset all his projects for the
which assumed to her eyes the proportions of a catastrophe, all her

progression reassured him somewhat; but, at any rate, he only stopped
seen about half-past seven oclock that evening. He asked who rode it;

to escape, all Courtins hopes went with him. Consequently, at any

the current.
"That shows you know nothing about it," replied the fisherman, with a

"Because you seem to me, my good sir, to be ignorant of the first
of francs."
"The Jeune Charles," said the sailor, reflectively, "whats the
yelp when bitten. Heave your own log and dont trouble yourself about
and you must get away as fast as you can."
figure then appeared in the bows; the boat came up on the starboard
not distinguish, so hidden were they in a thick woollen muffler which
"I am not Monsieur de la Logerie, thats a fact," said Courtin. "I am
say so at once, and you shall be put ashore with the honors you
myself. My good mistress said to me, says she: Courtin, my good
captain, accompanying his words with a pantomine which--thanks to the
"I came aboard because I have business with you," replied the other,
that you are mistaken. You ask the fellow who is backing and filling
addressing the mate, "take this one to the stewards pantry and give
of it before we cross the line!"

tell you that I am her farmer, it is as true as it is that theres a


And Courtin slowly drew a handkerchief from his pocket.
blowing your nose with your fingers, and I said to myself, Bless me!
discovered. You have only just time to go and tell the worthy captain
who was in darkness and not a little uneasy at the turn that matters
Picaut quivered at the sound of that voice; he had not yet seen his
"Ha!" continued Joseph Picaut, "you are not mistaken. Hes the

pulled off his jacket and tore open his shirt. The captain then came
Courtin, who gave a sigh of relief, "I beg your pardon, my worthy
shore as best he could.
Then, indeed, he congratulated himself on the success of his trick, so
When the door into the courtyard closed after them, and they

it must be said that Maître Courtin did think, in this first flush of
it had he not himself been so preoccupied; but at the moment he was


therefore stay by Michel, from whom he could undoubtedly obtain the

ask myself why you have become so kind and attentive and devoted."


of satisfaction.
with all his plans, "Ive got a good deal to do in town."
Michel yielded to Courtins reasoning, and giving a glance at his
turn, together with his patriotic feelings, made him deeply
"Jean Oullier."

among the sunken roads of the Retz region, where a tiny foot, a fair


him and sell it."

retreat.
end of a damp and muddy blind alley full of the sordid booths of
              COURTIN MEETS WITH ANOTHER DISAPPOINTMENT.

"Where did you meet him?"
nor there. I gave him an errand to do."

"No,--do you say no?"
questions were leading him,--though he was not sorry to admit the
"_Mordieu!_ youre right."
"Evil is good sometimes," said Michel, laughing in his turn. "But
to us, so as to be ready in case of need."
on his right; he went in that direction, and saw a young peasant-woman
that milestone, however, he could keep the two young people in
Michel, keeping at a short distance behind them.

"No, Courtin, I shall carry her off!"
"Then who will tell her?"





bridge?"






"Very good; then the day after to-morrow at Saint-Philbert," repeated
"All right."
                                XXXII.
and in danger. Therefore, when Bertha came to him with the news of the
"What is it, father?" she said. "What are you thinking of?"


Maître Jacques had opened his heart to a renewed hope of recovering
a fisherman who was willing, for the consideration of a few louis, to
mouth of the Loire?"

once forgot his griefs, his hopes, his memories; he forgot Souday and
elsewhere, she could see the tall masts and spars of several vessels;
proceeding would end by leading them astray from their post of

with the latters bowsprit; the boat heeled over, shipped a sea, and
villain!--every stitch set! And see how it draws!"

The captain appeared on the poop.
"No, they are passengers! Arent you looking out for passengers?"
this about?"
accident has happened to the persons who were to embark on your ship?"

bonds, he had no sooner caught sight of the coast of La Vendée, which
He might possibly have succeeded in flinging himself overboard if he
one who told you the truth."
you nothing."

The skipper and the marquis gave him each a hand, and Joseph Picaut
"No, captain, thank you."
illness, and had often expressed to her the utmost attachment to his
join him, persuaded her father to put off entering Nantes till he
Aigrefeuille, and saw the money, or rather the bank-bills, which


take him and keep him safely concealed till he was well.
saw the doctor.


whose physician I am." Then, seizing a moment when the widow passed
shall never forget the friendship my poor husband felt for him.
returned to the hiding-place in which they lived while the husband and
I have also found it impossible to extract the ball."
his presence."
"Thats true. I see you cant have much confidence in her pity. And
three days hence, after the fever subsides, he can be left alone all
about Jean Oullier, replied that she had followed the advice of her
Jean Oulliers wound was so severe that he really hung for a fortnight
he now implored the widow to bring him some news of the Marquis de
his hitherto empty brain, and over-excited it with all the more
overcome with the violence of the emotions he had just passed through,
some scheme of violence such as all Chouans cherish traditionally, and


"I want the mayor for myself."
"Caused what?"
presents like that to such a villain? Besides, those fifty thousand
"_Sacredié!_" exclaimed Maître Jacques; "you make my mouth water. Look
to make em speak,--those who didnt want to?" said Maître Jacques,
"You shall do as you like. But come! tell me exactly where your pair
"Ah, ha! so it was true, what they said, that if you did not strike
sure to come by different roads."
Joseph agreed to the place and promised to be there. The widow heard
As she walked thoughtfully along, the hatred she felt to her

obedience to Petit-Pierres injunction, she should seek the princess
Logerie.
little iron grating that the person knocking was alone, he opened, or
Michel had used to obtain the two horses from the landlord of the
Rosny?"
"Monsieur is engaged just now. I will announce you as soon as he has
expression, "I will wait Monsieurs leisure and employ the time in

feet square, and was separated from an adjoining room by a partition,
him; he dropped his arm, and then, leaning his head against the

then Courtin had not been able to see his face; but, just as he passed
formerly received Michel; on this occasion, however, Maître Pascal was
"What do you want?"

Courtin, noticing his annoyance, saw that he had gone too far; but it

"Did Monsieur de la Logerie only give you a verbal message for the
"Because one cant do everything all at once; and I am not going back
condemned to death, and I dont wish to say a word to bring him back
"Go on!" said Maître Pascal, smiling.

slowly, like a man at leisure, stopping to gaze like a countryman into

sun was getting low and he wanted to get home before night-fall.

somewhere about fifteen hundred yards from the lake; the main, in fact

baronial castle in the province, built to hold the country in check
the fruiting sorbus to the fig-tree.
the lake and protected on the other side by a broad moat hollowed in

small chambers, which, notwithstanding the colossal appearance of the

ridges of the old ruin.
since the double defeat at Chêne and La Pénissière, had drawn closer
went over to the Whites it is a fact that youve stopped gabbling
but ghosts are left to roam now."
him all the same."
them to the man who had spoken to him.

He reached them by the shore of the lake, followed the moat, and


from his pocket a wax candle and a sulphur match, lighted the candle
double the size it used to be. One might get a boat in now."
"Did you hear that?" asked Monsieur Hyacinthe, uneasily.
seen roaming about here to-day, I feel sure he wont dare to risk a
and sat down himself on the cellar steps.
"Then why have you brought me here? Ha! if I have a regret it is that



way, but we follow him from a distance. You see for yourself the thing
to think you are deceiving me, I will blow your brains out."
"You may rely upon my word, which is sacred; a man is honest, or he is
give me courage. Give me that gold if you wish me to be as calm, as


"What is the matter?" asked Monsieur Hyacinthe again, beginning to
"Why not yet?"
inundated vault.
about?"
"Damn it! why didnt you say so before, and Id have finished him at
toes!"
motionless.
hugging to his breast, and he sprang forward to tear it from him.
brother. The lantern rolled down the steps into the waters below and
the waters of the lake had forced their way into the tower.

or the other might revive and remember he was here, and execute
torch in one hand, and dragging with the other a heavy musket, the
"A priest! a priest!" cried the dying man, horrified by that awful
of God that strikes you through me--Cain!"
of your accomplices at the ford of the Boulogne? No, an eye for an
who received the ball you meant for your brother-in-law; the man who
Jacques to save Courtin, he was the one to receive the shot.
had almost forgotten him. Well, that innocent, since you remind me of
rattle in his throat? He will be dead in ten minutes, and then it will

God! he does not answer me! Oh, Pascal, why do you turn away your
loved as his own child, a tear forced its way from her eyelids; and



and I know it. Ive made too many such holes not to know all about it.
In the portrait Maître Jacques had drawn she recognized the duchess.

"Hell find strength, never fear; hes a man,--a man indeed such as
able to find that booty somewhere."
"You are right; then give it all to the poor. The hands that receive
"By the bye, la Picaut, when you go for him, give him this roll of

have over there will give when you tell him all."
this man, totally unlike that of his compatriots, never belied itself
begged her not to let any one pass into the ruins; then, flinging her

you; on the contrary, I am to say that an old friend whom you thought
requests of him."

"You cannot go to Nantes on foot; you would get there too late. In the
then, as rapidly as possible, she struck across the fields to her own
Her recollections of that evening preceding the fight at Chêne, the
rapidly; gave him a double feed of oats to put into his legs the
in the peasant-womans dress she wore, she passed through the
never leave us an easy moment."

"Banl[oe]uvre?" she repeated. "No, thats not in our parts. Is it a
"Well done!" cried the lieutenant. "Heres a pretty girl who wants

"Goodness! you talk of shooting a man as you would a rabbit in a

"Oh, oh!" continued the lieutenant, "you are not going to get angry
"Arrest you on suspicion, and not let you off till you pay me the
"Why so?"
"But suppose there were any harm?"


He was no sooner out of sight than Bertha seized the remains of the
"Jean Oullier?" said the latter, gazing stolidly at the girl. "I dont


gallop became a run. Plains, valleys, and hedges passed and
A thousand confused ideas coursed through her brain; she blamed
compelled to slacken speed; the way was full of quagmires. Twice the
Her mind was full of these thoughts when she saw the white walls of
and looked within.
had guessed the whole at a single glance, so frightfully convulsed was
mad with terror and despair for the fate that was hanging over him; I,
know, Bertha!"

now you suddenly discover I am a woman, a being to be respected
sisters lips, "you are about to commit the crime you denounce in
"Pardon you! you?" cried Bertha, pushing Mary away from her. "No! you
"Bertha! Bertha!"
kneeling down before her sister, who, shaken at last beyond her
go far away; forget me! Go at once!"

will consecrate our lives; and there will still be happiness, my
"Yes, monsieur."
"Mademoiselle," replied the latter, with painful politeness, "like you
Profiting by the confidence that the officer felt in the precaution
vigorous stride of her good English beast carried her toward Nantes.
water and soiled with mud presented himself at the Prefecture, and on
the emissaries of the law could burst in the door on the rue du
walls of the Archbishops garden and the adjoining houses, skirted the

enter the house and known not to have left it, proved the existence of
The police then searched the neighboring houses, sounding the walls

Almost at the same time, although it was scarcely daylight, the work
newspapers produced a thicker smoke and greater heat than the peat had

Duchesse de Berry.
There are moments when nature seems so gentle, so friendly, that it is

they would have perished asphyxiated if they had not succeeded in
the prisoners became more and more difficult; another ten minutes in

safeguard of French honor!"
on his head, ignoring that a woman was a prisoner there,--a woman
position.

"Two ushers, to turn that man out."
the portfolio.

"Ah, general!" she said, laughing, "if you had not treated me as they
National Guards, who made a lane from the house to the castle, the
august prisoner.
"I know all, Madame," said Bertha, lifting her eyes, that were red


"Tell him to return to the château, and stay there quietly; he shall
"Where shall I send it to you?"


the last of the name, should have helped to fling royalty into the




imagination counted and re-counted the sum belonging to him, which was
thought of words of entreaty to reach the heart of that Jew, threats
themselves in his flesh, where they made a burning furrow. All dreams
He was in one of these moments of torpor when a noise without made him
companion, pointing with her finger to Courtin; and then, as if
"Come, open your eyes, Monsieur le maire. We have something to say to
and to-day, exhausted and half dead as I am, they have brought me back
I never put you in any danger, I never did you any harm."
that luckless shot, I know I am as white as the driven snow. Yes, I
whom you rightly supposed I was defending? Who, having done that,
slipped into Pascal Picauts house, sold to the Blues the secret he
treacheries? Who, I say, was that man, if not you?"
was there. You forget all that, while, on the contrary, you rake up
"On the day of that hunt when the father of Monsieur Michel was
"No, I am not mistaken; it is He who has put into my heart this hatred


nothing can move my will, or shake my resolution. You shall die!"
kneeling statues we often see at the foot of some ancient monument.
"Free?"
So saying, Jean Oullier took his knife and cut the cords that bound
another knife like my own and say to you: Defend yourself, Maître
of the Vendéan, sonorous as the clarion of battle, calling to him:--
him her hand.
have gone there; and I fear some disaster from the delay."
             SHOWS THAT A MAN WITH FIFTY THOUSAND FRANCS
better do. His first idea was to go at once to his own house; but that
lift it; the weight of the mass of gold he carried hurt him, and had
common-sense. No matter how carefully he glided beside the hedges,
way to Nantes and obtain a seat in it, which would shorten the way and
doubt, some fisherman, intending to gather in his nets before

fortunate chance had brought to that spot, would enable him to crown
enough from the shore, and that it was high time to turn the boats
"Port-Saint-Martin, I say! Go to your right! It is very well not to
to the mans face, and then, with a stifled cry, fell on his knees at
it; repent, and pray that your doom may not be too severe."

that, Maître Courtin, think of that!"
Jean Oullier. "Ha, you found a weapon! Well, so much the better,--so
Nature was calm; the night silent; the breeze scarcely ruffled the
surrounded him. Death, terrible, hideous, menacing, effaced all else.

As Jean Oullier spoke the boat gave a lurch; the water had reached the

in spite of him, got into his throat. Again he called to Jean, but
time, and then, dragged down by his gold as by a demon, he went to the
had been all his life, he resolved to struggle to the last. On he
his youth; to the two young girls who had taken the places of those he
gilded with its earliest fires the waters of the lake,--the same
"Gladly," said Michel; "and I thank you, monsieur, swearing to you
floating on the surface of the water, about fifty feet from the shore,

justice!"
his white hair. Although his dress was humble, this peasant occupied
"This is the place."
sound of the knocker gave a funeral note, which echoed through the

seemed about to exhale their parting breath.
thought these embraces were lasting too long, for she coughed
me. God, who might have left me longer on this earth, deigns to recall

At this moment Mary felt the hand of Bertha seeking hers; for the
the presence of her Creator; she lifted herself up, murmuring:--

"Do not turn our blessed mothers mind from the celestial path she now

night before. Mary saw through her tears a _prie-dieu_ surmounted by a
Sainte-Marthe was dead, and Mary was free to look at what she had
The carriage and those it contained were still waiting before the

BY ALEX. DUMAS.
57 ROSE STREET.


The shrieks of the women, squeezed in the press, the wailing of the
As the men carried their lanterns to the places where the pieces would
faces, and flashed from the bayonets of the city guardsmen, as
her, “do not lean out so, or you will have some rough fellow snatch a

there is some way of getting on.”

snarled the baron.


Gilbert, gazed on her rather than at the show, except because it charmed
trampling on each other over there to get away. Do you not hear those
At first surprised but soon frightened, the people drew back without
current: but at the corner of Madeline Street, a band of fugitives
neighing, the clatter of the vehicles on the pavement cumbered with the
seized the soldier by the throat and upset him.
brought up against the Royal Wardrobe Building, and he was sheltered in

His features had the mobility of Southerners’, strangely blending power
Gilbert nerved himself. He felt that here alone was safety, for here was
Balsamo heard this voice from the depths; he saw the white figure lifted

entangled, while the clothes were ripped and the faces livid.
the horrible news had spread over Paris, mourning as if a hurricane had
hatred for the cause of their injuries than pity for the effect. He had
regard with professional pleasure, he said:
arm was broken by my falling into a ditch. You say the rich and noble
goddess when I leave the aristocrat on his deathbed to run and relieve
tearful voice calling:
many places. Where do they lie thickest?”
girl would wander anywhere, with her crazed head, seeking flight in any
“Fear nothing, for I must be seeking, too. Usually the lad comes home
“Shocking sight,” said the old man, before a mound of the suffocated.
“Gilbert? do you know our farmer’s son, Gilbert, and were you seeking
the surgeon, who was still croaking:
“Ho, ho, so it is you, my lord, again?” sneered the surgeon, perceiving
“No, but to this poor lad.”
With his sleeves tucked up to the elbow and his arms smeared with blood,

their rights, do not excite their revengeful feelings. If ever they move
“Take my lantern,” said the author to Taverney as he passed him: “I need

on both flanks but, though decimated, its centre was kept out of peril.

leading to a summerhouse in the gardens, where Philip had induced a
trembling with spite at his pitiful line of reasoning falling to pieces.

the hand into his waistcoat for an improvised sling.
window, thrown back as if in a faint, Philip, recognizing it, leaped
But Philip passed at once from joy to doubt and said:
merits--the young lady, less ill than she may appear.”
lives in Saint Honore Street, near the Feuillant’s Monastery. This is
was frightened.
“Philip--father!” she uttered as speech returned to her at last.
“Her slumber is calm and peaceful as a child’s,” he said. “Let her sleep
practitioner, a light of medical science to attend to his ails. The
obstinacy and perpetual dreaming.
street.
he leaned out of the casement as to throw himself on the ground. He


it. Nicole kicked it when she came to it and kept on playing football

spring. From the clouds it was a black gulf before Gilbert, through




seems that one cannot die. But I am so weak from the shock having been
Andrea blushed and seemed ill at ease. Either he did not remark it or
“Oh, Philip,” she said with an effort, “I have almost forgotten--I was
prayer to heaven, I saw the eyes sparkle of a man who towered over the
extraordinary went on within me: shaken, bruised, powerless and nearly
“When do you think this faint came on?”

what anxiety you must all be, I begged to be taken home at once. They
“Yes, I fancy I did see him a few paces off, as you and I were driven
“But the odd part of it was that I found in his clenched hand a rag from
“Ugh,” grumbled Gilbert, with gloomy contempt for this haughty

But judging what the Austrian princess’s humor is, I wager that as much
though sparkling. Alas, brother, we are obscure to go amid so much
and I shall take it. Don’t you have any scruples, either. The only

“That is good. Have you any money, Philip?” asked the old noble.

“Good night, brother,” said Andrea as Philip also stood up: “I am
WHAT GILBERT EXPECTED.

the way to the garden when Gilbert showed himself in a moonbeam.

crime to receive a love-letter--not like sneaking in to peep at poor
a guardsman!”
picture of Andrea letting down her fine tresses.
Rousseau had not only taken special pains over his attire, but arrayed
“We will pick our steps. Can one be too fine to court Mother Nature?”
“Where? did you bring eatables in your carriage?”

The single room was large enough to hold a table and half-a-dozen
“Do not call it mine!”
summerhouse door, where two pretty women presented themselves arm in

sister, Mdlle. Chon, who at least is no stranger to Friend Gilbert.”

He bowed to the women in a tragic manner, unable to contain himself, and
“I should be glad to be a gardener at Trianon Palace.”
THE LITTLE TRIANON.
vines and creepers.
said Louis; “She speaks French nicely, but with an Austrian accent
wife will lose by it.”
“Sire, you have to walk along straight paths between shaped boxwood
for them as they are.” She pointed to the windows of a corridor, over
“Only the girl.”

“Your Majesty, Council of Parliament at Versailles at half-past two.”
“What nice flowers! how can you talk of changing your garden? who the

she would hunt the King as steadfastly as he would the deer.
“Dear me, an accident,” said the lady, tranquilly.


but the marshal was inflexible.
“Oh, no, it is with a man--but he is not an ordinary man--he is a
“This is growing dark. At least you can name the wizard?”
entertains one capitally.”
“In the walnut copse, yes. Let us stay here while the prince goes to



lovely Italian woman who seemed rebellious to his entreaties. She had no
in company where the fictitious sun, artificial light, glows on the
know that you shall not die while I am at hand to guard and heal you.”
bounds to the magician’s powers--she believed this--and he was saved.
long sought it, as the sun blinds those who wish to see the very origin
Scarcely was the word pronounced before Lorenza bent like a lily on its
entered the house in Saint Claude Street.
redoubtable token.
back.

     Dubarry’s squibs, but they will raise a town. An evil rumor has
are lost.”

“and what a pity it cannot be placed by sure hands before the King.”

“You, saved my life, count?” questioned Richelieu, in consternation.
bursting into laughter.
“Most naturally, for your prediction that I should become a queen is
could divine what troubled so the favorite and the court conspirator


which the lady has over his heart?”
opposition against the royal authority.”

have been trying to get one for five years and spent a hundred thousand
is the enemy of your ladyship.”
“It is the plain, literal copy of a letter from Lady Grammont on the
“And the count would have kept the precious original as a treasure,”
“You want to know in a minute as much as I, the sage, the adept, who has
how you obtain such secrets?”

and share. You shall hear the mystic voice.”

handkerchief.
the Voice but not what I conjure it with.”

“Two, a man and a woman: the man is the Duke of Richelieu, the woman,
“What has happened to this letter, which I wrote under your dictation?”
“I know not--roads are alike.”
“Take the turn, and after!”
“You must now follow with attention. But you are weary. Be your
“Choiseul,” whispered the countess to the duke who nodded.

difficulty, with his right he wrote the lines which Duke Choiseul was



visitors, absorbed in the flood of thoughts tumultuously overwhelming
and seemed agitated, though he tried to conceal his emotion. An icy
“Well, it was an order of exile,” said he, “for I have read it. Thus it

“Hang it! will he coax the King over, again?” muttered Richelieu.
“Surely brother and sister may correspond?”
though he were struck by apoplexy. But for the open air coming on his
the preserver of the traditions of Lady Pompadour playing the

It was the Duke of Aiguillon, nephew of Richelieu, who would probably
“Farewell, princess,” he said in a choking voice.
It was indeed our hero, who had in a fit of philosophical fervor,
in the grounds with her architect and head-gardener. In the upper story
curious kindness of destiny.



he looks upon her. Confound this trembling, unworthy of a man! but she
through the sumach bushes like a frightened blackbird.
pale and alarmed by this encounter and accosting:
“I will see you to her,” said the King, “for I am going to my
were not any too warmly clad.
do him the honors of the house.

fidgetted as though he was looking for somebody or something.

“How do you do, duke?” he said; “are you still chiming in with Lady
“Sire, your Majesty has given my nephew Aiguillon the command of the
your Majesty for: it is for an old comrade of mine, a good old friend,
a question, she fell back a step, blushing and wringing her hands. The
through Touraine; “and I ought to have thought of that when I gave the
all paid for.”
Preceded by a lackey carrying a lantern, the young lady crossed the

and it made him start.


when asleep.
“Though she is married?”
“It said that?” cried the ravished prince.
it might make your love incurable and turn the object cold.”
Richelieu was going to Baron Taverney’s residence in Coq-Heron Street.

by her candle, enabled the old noble to read her character at a glance.
to be the Prime Minister but now that I have declined the post I can ask
“Yes.”


void is made at court by these low fashions.”
far-reaching views, calculation and boldness of these vixens; one who
this evening she went to her lodgings, without a maid, or footman, and
“I wonder why, when she seems cut out for the part?”

hour before a toilet glass these blemishes will disappear, as the baron
“Let Nicole go to the Trianon, since you think it will please the King,”


She raised her head as the door opened, and uttered a slight cry of
attempt to squeeze a tear out of her fine eyes.
a company of soldiers from the King. As he saw master was sorrowing
“Oh, there must be a peep at something through the windows. If one can
     quickly pick up the tone and manners of the palace; take care not
answered with the following record of what was passing:
the astuteness and corruption of her tempters.


window, but she looked up on hearing him singing a song of their old
“Good evening, Gilbert: are you here?”
nearer and passing under his nose with audacity he recognized him as the
flowers, making things lively for the people of that trifling world, the
How would they take it?
eagerness as he had been trying to meet him lately without the old fox
“If I failed, you have won, and that is enough for the house of

anteroom.
a statue on its pedestal, and did not even put out his hand to take the
“How could anybody suspect that Parliament would so smartly rap the

likes me. She is brave and has full power over the King’s mind. I thank
“The King will.”
“Who will net the lion?”

     “MY DEAR UNCLE: Your kind advice has borne fruit. I confided my

“You goaded me on.”
“Nothing; you could not but show your spite because the Dubarry woman
“Oh, you think evil will come of it?”
will take you green goslings and sweetmeats when you lie in prison.”
till the Parliament has debated on them, and then go and see your

lady who was stepping out unassisted.
“Yes, your grace.”
when she got to the third courtsey.




“My lady, the King forgets himself--and we forget our duty too,”
“And so I was. Yours is the first example I cite among the cases which
breath of Discord--’ I stopped at the breath, my lady; the figure of
This disgrace struck the lawyer like a thunderbolt: recovering from the
“How right they are who say that your lordship is generous and liberal!”
guns into the courtroom,” replied the proctor.
court, Lady Dubarry, who is perhaps powerful enough to open this
pettifoggers are causing me; and you might kindly add that it was at my

Majesty--these Parliamentarians---- ”


you who can influence the King, would get him to say: ‘I will have Lady



Lord High Chancellor Maupeou, hearing where the King was, solicited an
“But they will hold no law courts in exile, Sire.”

She seemed a ray of lustre from the King whose left-hand queen she was.

the speaker with a glance of her fine eyes. Lady Dubarry, electrified,
The effect of the royal ultimatum was immediately favorable to the royal
“I seem to know you--we have met before?” queried the old man.
Waiting till he had gone, the other young man addressed the philosopher,
Rousseau meandered among the groups without remembering that he was old

his wife, the spitfire of this modern Socrates.
some pamphleteer, living near me, in the league, who will watch what I
am not an enthusiast and I would not believe this association could work

the houses, became lost on the road as though they fell down some

symbolical than accurate. A solitary lamp swung from the ceiling and

with a more explicit gesture, he declared the lodge open.
acquiescence of this distinguished mind and honest and energetic

where the light is quenched, none of us may be able to revive it---- ”
science--comfort, future and promise where another tells of material


the philosopher with pride, “but I think that I shall do more for the
ideas and presence are the Light. Do not plunge us into the double

He went out upon these words, and many members at his heels.
now Balsamo, showed his ring. On it were graved the letters L. P. D.
traitor. He will be your ruin, brothers. Watch at Paris, for there the
undermine. Do not forget, though, that they have an army of fierce
Minister, with one of gold, may buy one of the superiors.

loses the victory if the general is slain. Brothers, watch for the
end of the letter from the great prophet Swedenborg, one of the greatest
letter and the chief’s speech, “the oath which binds us and pledges us

in the center of Europe like its heart, and it makes the other parts of
the fruit of the toil: all France is crying for Choiseul and rising to

iron. A revolt, though it be put down, enlightens slaves more on their
oak they chop at the root. Woodmen, take the ax, let us hack at the base
and smashed. You cannot wish this. You cannot obtain the warrant from
will bow to him and courtiers will kiss the ax which lops off his head.

for we possess a dread secret, comprising crimes which no power,
“Be penetrated with the necessity of blind obedience which makes the
again be committed or else I shall have recourse to discipline.
out in his turn, alone and silent so as not to awaken suspicion. The
deeply in their heart as never to be able to wrench them out.”



“To Surgeon’ Hall,” was the reply. “I have selected a corpse there, a
“Pride, more pride,” muttered the Italian.
Marat pulled off the shroud of coarse linen from the two unfortunates
“And why should I feel in the matter? Against sadness, I have
“Oh, I have probed living bodies.”
operators are rather materialists.”
there medicines,” sneered Marat with a bitter laugh. “You use words
is the seat of a curious malady.”
these are all methods of torture appertaining to barbarous peoples and
“I have seen something of the kind in operation, the Maiden, it is
society that discovers that will be the best and most enlightened.”

“Yes, if you hold that the soul is the moving impulse--the
of death. He seemed to sue from the surgeon and assistants some smile of
the latter had seen through him, the young surgeon whispered to him:
“Just what I have done,” replied Marat, while the patient was tied down.
“You believe such separation will never come?” said Balsamo.
himself before the patient, whose frightened and terror-filled eyes he
Everybody looked at this stranger whom they took for a lunatic.
perfectly unruffled voice strongly contrasting with that heard from him


cut, but the patient did not flinch or utter a sigh.
“I was only ten years old, my lord.”
      Drawn from the sky-blue lake:
ear.

made the discovery which you have witnessed. But, gentlemen and brothers

The bystanders looked at each other.
for him that their prayers have been granted.”
“God hath sent to his bedside a charitable lord who took pity on him,
menacing at the first.
not to lose my leg.”




court shepherdesses flirted. The Dauphiness sang correctly, but she was
angel.”

her play Colette. But I took the part to have some amusement and I am
news-mongers. Each received a gain or a sting, with pain or shame. There
group of Hypocrisy and Corruption signing a treaty of union.
     Colin leaves me all alone.”



turned pale with joy, and was drawn under the royal box, where they
alone.”

for what his master had left on the toilet table, came forth immediately
furnished by the King. And Mdlle. de Taverney is nigh to being a
good at spelling. For me, delighted signifies pleased beyond measure. If

“Yet I thought that the rural swains rooted out ill weeds. In short,
Taverney’s disquiet became anxiety.
few thousand livres, which his Majesty, flattered by having heard his
“How so?” asked Taverney, stupefied.
you have lived latterly like a Red Indian; there is no likeness. What

Joseph of Biblical name was impure alongside of me.”
friends. She is capable of quitting the King and running away.”
Light as a page, he skipped out of the gallery, leaving the old baron



“My lord, if the countess is finding diversion elsewhere, the more
“Sire, would it not rather be your Majesty who has given her cause for
“Overflowing with gratitude.”
Andrea.”
Louis XV. was not a good King, but he was a first-rate boon companion;


“Pray, let us have the whole truth,” said the monarch, while Taverney
“Oh, I am well aware that it would make the philosophers fly to arms,”
into the arena, was palpitating with hope and fear while trying to

This was adroit flattery. Louis always admired the lusty old age of this


young lady shall have all my protection. I fear she is not richly
Marshal,” called the King, rising. “Did the little creature like the
“All things taken into account and pondered over, it must be stated,
As the hour of noon was sounding from the Trianon clock, Nicole ran in
“Sister, I am under orders to go and join my regiment at Rheims.”
“That is it. Have you something particular to say?” he questioned, made
me. Sometimes he looks at me so that I am frightened. I am more afraid
by this genuine fright, “you make too much of affection for which I
“You are right,” she said, staying her tears, “and I am mad. See, I am
Andrea assumed a calm face and said in a tone too firm not to be
A slight sound in the thicket--a sigh, she took it to be, made her turn.

“It was chance,” stammered the young man, who found it hard to tell her
be all alone in the world by the departure of Master Philip. But no, my
would be more likely to be seen if erect, and she did not wish to be
you? In truth, I have made a mistake about you. I took you for a pert
only knows what other defects have been implanted in you to
respect your father?”
natural, for it was a year ago. Therefore I must remind or inform you.

pressed that to my lips, in time to stop the blood which flew up from my


it flies to show its tusks and bloodshot eyes.
They seemed to brighten up still more at the sight of the girl, and made
sat on a folding-chair, with one elbow on her harpsichord.
daughters,” added the baron, gushingly.
answer his Majesty on your behalf?”
He took leave, while Taverney swelled with pride and hope. He was a



“It is strange,” said the girl, clasping her hands, “that his Majesty
maiden of sixteen who makes old grenadiers like me blush!”
He concentrated a look full of caresses upon her.
like virtue by its being made agreeable. Virtue, prudish, lugubrious,
He gave the gold to his daughter, kissed her hand and went out. He

“I wish you would come along with me, little lass,” he said; “I should

“Oh, that is granted. You will not be imprisoned and driven from the


“I never thought of that, but I do now, and that I had better stay.”
night for Nicole? She might be up a dozen times.”
Exchequer notes. “If you were to put a couple of drops from my own
master-key.”
SECOND SIGHT.

stone. Gliding like a serpent up to the terrace wall, hedged with
main thing is to get away. Can we be off in a couple of hours?”


take, she said:
coming day. The tuner was to come for her harpsichord and some books
Nicole went out and glided into the garden.
Andrea’s corridor, he beheld her, garbed in white, at the top step,
Not knowing to what errand to ascribe this night roaming, he watched
Something like pincers nipped Gilbert’s heart and he half rose to see

enter a house--we go up to the wall which opens to let us pass through.
“Yes; but what was she doing these two hours before? Trace back.”
fingers pressed the lion’s head.”
“She stops in a room where are armor and furs: a safe is open but a


which she had left on the call of Balsamo.
wood and brick squeak on the way to the chamber.
put that out also if he had time, but the steps creaked now on the
Passing within two paces, this intruder walked into the other room.
night visitor that his eyes would have pierced a wall.
He meant to call out; but the reflection that this was the Lord’s

beauty and regarded the royal threat as a robbery intended on him.

Gilbert trod on the wick and in sudden obscurity was blotted out the




painful neigh.
“Are you Lord Sartines?”




sequestrated me.”
“This is different,” said Sartines: “but have despatch for my time is
is the bargain.”



“But his name, his name?’

a sham. Thereupon with a cold chisel he cut it off bodily. Instead of
Opening one of the twenty-four drawers of the famous desk, he took out a
Sartines rang a bell for a servant to whom he said:
at times.
“Order to set aside five hundred thousand francs for his police
paragraph, that it made him turn pale to see himself in the glass. He

again, crossing his legs.
to think that if you had not called I should have had to send for you.”
the world---- ”
Certainly, Proct Proteon Proteus had not more shapes, Jupiter more
and the downfall of thrones.”
to the man.”
“Why, sir, I told you that I knew the names he hides under but I do not
“Then you would be this Acharat, Balsamo, and Company?”
“How so?”
exquisitely carved as though Cellini had chiselled it, he tranquilly

what is going on; and one of the things I have learnt most about is the
timber. The next thing was to fill them, as empty grainarers are
“Perfectly clear,” replied the other. “But it seems to me that you are


people; the King is not an affectionate man. As soon as the cries of the
I saw him hooked up on the very gibbet at Montfaucon which was built
the very ones who bring others to account. When I write the particulars
you have your proofs.”
“I?” said the magistrate, laying his fist on the box with so much force

“And how are you, count?” she added to Fenix, holding out her hand.
“With all respect to your ladyship,” said Sartines, “I am afraid you are

“Count,” said the lady with her most winning smile, “will you kindly
He saw them march forth without showing the rage Balsamo expected.
would arouse her, and walked out. We had no orders to detain her.”
his ignorant clerks interpreted according to their lights. Our craft is
be a child forever!”


In five minutes Balsamo was in his vestibule, looking at Fritz and
He was going to awake her to vent the reproaches on her which were
angry fire: his knotted hands like those of a skeleton, trembled and
master.
physician to others.”
“Yes; the work of regeneration was commenced thirty-two days ago.”
and I have myself given you the white drops you prescribed.”
I hold will be lost for man, who would thus through me be linked with
most of my old nature. My strength has nearly disappeared. Youth is



Without answering the threat in any way, Balsamo prepared all things for
Before the Italian beauty, Balsamo stopped, with his heart full of
accursed angel I owe captivity, exile or death, with ruin and dishonor

“demon or angel of the future, you ought to be satisfied. I have long
“Will you accept this life instead of the real one?”
Andrea is young, and pure, and I do not love Andrea. Nevertheless, in
his active, multiple, perplexed existence. For three days he felt no
crown to his happiness.
“Try me.”
“A young negro, eating candies.”
“You made her the promise to give her the water of beauty which Venus
“Oh heaven, if she should be here in that time, I shall have no more to

As he closed the door he thought he heard a sound: but no, Lorenza was
CHAPTER XXIX.
“Gracious, did you know that I was coming?”
for it seems to me that you are too good and useful to me in taking the
informed him. So he smiled without venturing on the unknown ground.

almost as great a conjurer as your lordship.”
“but I should like to know---- ”
numerous and powerful sect formed of courageous, resolute and skillful

of blood color.
CHAPTER XXX.

“Come, come, let us reason,” he said, “Lorenza is no more here, and
lowered and on which he stepped.
“Master,” said he, looking for something to lean against, “you must not
liquid reflected on the sides.
weight of her hair.


Feliciani. He took away his head from hers; it had lost its warmth
He held back no longer; besides, it was important that neither Fritz nor
spread an expression of stupor and lack of intelligence. Bloody foam
Without adjusting his dress or hiding the blood spot, Balsamo went down
“Go, I bid you,” said the master, and he entered the parlor.
theirs formed a horse-shoe in front of his so that he occupied the place
“Accused?” faltered the other, vaguely. “Still I do not understand.”
“You answer as with a perturbed and tumultuous conscience. But
Paris about him who was designated as a traitor. It was not easy to
stranger still. To arrest those friends, Sartines must have had the note
of your house with this casket and went to the Chief of Police. Thus all
harvest. An obedient servant she committed the treachery and you had but
Copt, the luminous ray who had the cowardice to let your wife shield you
the sentence, then: Joseph Balsamo is a traitor. He has broken his oath,
“Do you fear that I will commit suicide?” said the accused with a bitter
The High Justicer of heaven did not wait for you to come and slay her.”

hours previously she had been reposing before the old sage broke in.
a child, now dangled like cuttlefish’s suckers. In anger had been
quickness of gunpowder. The marble flour was turned into a sheet of
muscles relaxed, and a new serenity covered his features like a mask.
Althotas darted on him a look through the veiling flames, which was
having burnt up all that was combustible, and left the study bare to the

ridicule is fatal at court.”
herself and I am cursed with her for my daughter. What atrociously bad
He entered his daughter’s room to ferret about for some confirmation of
spoilsport. So she remarked that she ought not to have missed her time
But hardly had she cast her eyes on the page before black specks began
The priest rose and stole away on tiptoe, not wanting to risk his

sensible breath.

touching her. No, never!”
“And do you not prescribe anything?”
“I am glad to hear it, but he is a little wrong, for I do not feel at
For a month Gilbert wandered round the sick girl’s lodgings, inventing
“Hey, Gilbert!”
Content with this explanation, Philip dismounted, put the bridle round

that he had gone too far.
kindness and another unspoken feeling had mollified him: “I do like you;


came over me.”

her doctor says there is nothing to be alarmed at, tell me why you have
yet when I got there I never heard a word about the fabulous regiment of
house, for each of us, cooled off, without my being able to understand


“What do you want?”
“Precisely.”

“On the contrary, we must speak of this. And yet it is impossible. I
holy thing and who study religiously. In a materialistic age he studied
hand, not like a doctor to feel her pulse, but like a friend. She was

“Dissimulation?”
down your pride: you are _enceinte_!”
as this girl has aversion by her perseverance in falsehood.”
said, folding his arms:
cowards deserve for having been such a coward as to shelter yourself

“No, Andrea,” he cried, “it is I who shall die. You love me no more and
you, and so he is dear to me.
all but the belief that I am impious enough to take a false oath. Well,
“Well let us search out the criminal together,” continued the Knight of
“How did you part?”
Looking before me I saw the baron reflected in a mirror. I remember no
“No; but I felt all the symptoms which betoken his presence. I went into
without awaiting or listening for anything.
supplied him with the directions, and it was not without profound
the house.
“Then I shall wait till I see him.”
the more cool while the more roused up.
pike on guard so as to defend his master, who, standing on the stairs,
“Taverney? my lord, I was handsomely entertained by your father--be
He started back. He was but the shadow of himself: a smile of mortal

Balsamo smiled hopelessly as before.
“She herself, my lord---- ”

be deceived by my apparent weakness. It is a fact that I have scant
“You did it to plunge her into that inexplicable sleep which she has

slumber. In compensation of this fault, which it is just to pardon me, I

CHAPTER XXXVII.
to put to my sister; at least, spare her the incidents of the horrible
“It is done--she is asleep,” he said. “You doubt? To prove that I can


the count shut the door. Then he took up a candle and passed it to and
He joined the hands of brother and sister, and at once Andrea smiled and

“Oh, Philip, how unkind of you to believe that Andrea would deceive

word of honor. He who disposes of so wondrous a power would not act in
Nicole. Oh, goodness! the wretch! she has put some drug in the water and



“Just as I thought,” muttered Balsamo.

while her eyes glittered: “You will kill him, Philip?”
anteroom while Andrea fell on the sofa.
shame.”
my lord.”

to see Dr. Louis who will tell the Dauphiness that you are home-sick,
FATHER AND SON.

“Father, my sister and I are going to take leave of you.”

it was a sharp method, for a philosopher who does not like to see
“I thought that a man was born to me in my house,” said he: “a man who
dark, for I understand in my own way the honor of my house.”
“To your sister.”

With bloodshot eye, and a brow of fire, Philip clutched his swordhilt,
last gasp, he went into town to Rousseau’s house, formerly a sure haven,
“A brief hearing, my lord,” he said. “Do you not recall me?”

man whose name comprised such a dreadful accusation. Gilbert stood


apart. There is a Taverney the father. Tell him that you bring a fortune
     advance to Gilbert for the day when he signs the marriage contract
with his slow, sad step, went into the house.

a rope, there was danger because the baron lived there and Nicole was


I wanted to see---- ”


proposed marriage it was to act my part fitly; and I did not even expect

but was not reading.


“But it would not cost you more than one thousand for that,” said
free and intelligent. I can make my living anywhere.”
be leaving Paris shortly.”
“But you are going away. Whither?”
Balsamo wrote on a sheet of paper:
“We shall meet again,” said Balsamo.
believed that she would be a bad mother to the offspring of the lowborn
attend to on Royale Place where I must finish the night. To-morrow at
of the room and the glow of the fire. The cry struck her as a pain at
she felt her heart drawn towards the abandoned little one who lamented.
the next room, and the little mite cries not--as if protection was
“Bring it to me, and shut that door.”


Marguerite sleeps so soundly she did not hear the doctor coming for it
would sooner or later enter again into favor, and be the principal means
grows up it shall be my companion.”
a letter came by the post. It was addressed to:


Having written a farewell letter to the Dauphiness, Philip had no

with another’s, probably the officer of the watch. If it were a
as Philip had regretted that of France.
passenger also?”

if you are sportsmen.”
fingers closed on his own in acceptance of the courtesy.

“You see I could defend myself. But get your gun and shoot me straight.
away.”
will you restore it to me?”
“I do not want to butcher you,” said the officer, with froth at the
When he ran upon the strand the last boat was waiting. He made its tally
the most curious and interesting of sights.
not to put it to rout.

“Mortal?” echoed the King. “Doctors, is this true?”
Would the King mend and bring back Lady Dubarry, or would he die and his
“Ah, my clever surgeon,” he said.
when the life goes out. His successor is watching that signal, behind a
Suddenly, a coach drawn by eight horses gallopped out of the palace
man.

A short time ago, while making researches in the Royal Library for my
less faithful than in the history of M. Anquetil.
disguised names perhaps illustrious, or else that the bearers of these
Paris, a manuscript in folio, endorsed 4772 or 4773, we do not recollect
should not succeed--a very probable thing, by the by--in gaining
pleasure or the ENNUI he may experience.
hastened to don the cuirass, and supporting their somewhat uncertain
of April, 1625, the citizens, on hearing the clamor, and seeing neither
eye might have taken him for a farmer’s son upon a journey had it not
unfavorable feeling, which extended to his rider.
die tranquilly and honorably of old age, and if you make a campaign with
of steel. Fight on all occasions. Fight the more for duels being
Treville fought with others: in his first journey to Paris, five times;
On leaving the paternal chamber, the young man found his mother, who was
crowns, the horse, and the letter for M. de Treville--the counsels being
passers-by repressed their hilarity, or if hilarity prevailed over
and, as I have said, the auditors seeming to have great deference for
made all these remarks with the rapidity of a most minute observer, and
increased at every step; and instead of the proper and lofty speech he
“But I am speaking to you!” replied the young man, additionally
resumed the stranger, continuing the remarks he had begun, and

Majesty, who is seeking everywhere for brave fellows to recruit for his
Replace him on his orange horse, and let him begone!”
the ground, covered with blood and almost fainting.
“Your excellency is safe and sound?” asked the host.
grin of contempt; “for during his fainting we rummaged his valise and

stranger. The latter rose from the front of the window, upon the sill of
“In my wife’s chamber, on the first flight, where they are dressing his
they not obeyed me?”

lord--he insisted that notwithstanding his weakness d’Artagnan should
profusion over her shoulders, had large, blue, languishing eyes, rosy


his turn, after the servant. But his wound had rendered him too weak to

recipe in his hand composed a balsam, with which he anointed his
patience, turning out his pockets of all kinds over and over again,
related, that his sword had been in his first conflict broken in two,
“Yes, where is this letter?” cried d’Artagnan. “In the first place, I
“Does the letter contain anything valuable?” demanded the host, after a
“But it’s of no importance,” continued d’Artagnan, with natural
“Stolen? By whom?”
“I tell you I am sure of it,” continued the host. “When I informed him
that enormous sum for him on the account of the originality of his
Treville, which proved to be in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier; that is to

he had climbed four steps at a time.
the young prince where he made such good use of his sword, and was so
if the king were dissatisfied with anyone, and the hand to strike this
rivals vied with each other in procuring, not only from all the
Duplessis with an insolent air which made the gray moustache of his
Treville being there to claim them. Thus M. de Treville was praised to
further, in spite of sword thrusts which weaken, and painful exercises
Treville was one of the most sought.
contiguous to this antechamber, received visits, listened to complaints,
It was, then, into the midst of this tumult and disorder that our young
prevented, or at least endeavored to prevent, the three others from
five minutes three were slightly wounded, one on the hand, another on
On the landing they were no longer fighting, but amused themselves with
cracked their jokes upon his bandy legs and his crooked back. Some sang
“Certes, these fellows will all either be imprisoned or hanged,” thought
courtiers, and this his first appearance in that place, he was at length
magnificent baldric, worked in gold, which shone like water ripples in
believe you obtained that baldric by paternal generosity. It was given


is.”
from him by means of a traitor, a brigand, a rascal--has, with the help
replied Aramis.
“Sooner,” said Aramis.

trouble yourself to reveal your good luck; no one asks for your



when M. de Treville had three or four times paced in silence, and with a
the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal.”
yesterday while playing with the king, with an air of condolence very
“Ill--”
themselves to be arrested, to laugh at you! I am sure of it--they would
repeated as he went on, the insulting expressions of the captain to all
be heard but oaths and blasphemies. The MORBLEUS, the SANG DIEUS, the
and Francis the First, who was, as I have heard say, as good as other

moved to the bottom of his heart by this proof of courage, sprang toward
arrival of Athos, whose wound, though kept as a secret, was known to
the hotel. He pushed through the crowd, approached Athos, still

the present and the past, M. de Treville grasped the situation.

Musketeer’s uniform vastly increased by the great difficulties which
very well. I know these airs; I myself came to Paris with four crowns in
branches, and dancing. You will make some desirable acquaintances; and
d’Artagnan; “but it was perfidiously stolen from me.”
a smile of visible satisfaction; but this smile soon disappeared, and


“That will not prevent me,” replied d’Artagnan, “if ever I find him.”
moderately reassured, however, by the aspect of that countenance, full
endeavors have no other aim than the service of the king, and also the
me is to rail at him. Therefore, in spite of all my protestations, if it
do me the honor to esteem the resemblance of our opinions; but if you
“That is to say,” replied d’Artagnan, “that you will wait until I have
together, he seated himself at a table in order to write the promised
“He, my thief!” replied d’Artagnan. “Ah, the traitor!” and he
and was darting toward the stairs, which he reckoned upon descending
have heard Monsieur de Treville speak to us a little cavalierly today
D’Artagnan had already strode down three or four stairs, but at Athos’s

far.
folds of it. He was particularly anxious to avoid marring the freshness

“It is one that becomes a man accustomed to look his enemies in the
of the street.
a little cavalier.
unfortunate Athos was wounded on that very shoulder against which I must
it is true, but rather drolly ambiguous. Ah, cursed Gascon that I am, I
in the morning, and as a witness of the rebuke the Musketeers had
repair his intrusion. He stooped, and with the most gracious air he
Aramis darted at d’Artagnan one of those looks which inform a man that
were as you pretend it is,” said he, “I should be forced, my dear
guards who had declared himself the friend of Bois-Tracy, “Besides,”

“Ah, monsieur,” interrupted Aramis, “permit me to observe to you that
even for a folly, they are convinced that they have done already at
“I have said, monsieur, and I repeat, that the handkerchief did not fall
entertain a ridiculous partiality for my head, it seems to suit my
provisionally, I hold it good to be prudent. At two o’clock I shall have

courageous and less restrained might have done in his place. He
“Endure nothing from anyone but the king, the cardinal, and Monsieur de
waiting for his adversary with hat in hand, his feather even touching
“Yes, monsieur, I know only him.”

“Well?”
guarded, it would be known, I say, that we were to fight, and our combat

“your second witness is Monsieur Aramis?”
In the meantime, Porthos had come up, waved his hand to Athos, and then
“And I also am to fight with this gentleman,” said Aramis, coming in his

“And now you are assembled, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “permit me to


“I waited your orders,” said d’Artagnan, crossing swords.


it must be persisted in. To fight, that was to disobey the law, that was
the expression of his countenance, had guessed d’Artagnan’s design. “You
inexperience.
“What is your name, my brave fellow?” said Athos.

his adversary, and changing his ground and his guard twenty times.


again. Disarm him only--make sure of his sword. That’s it! Very well
D’Artagnan perceived that it would be disobliging Athos not to leave him
Athos, Aramis, and d’Artagnan surrounded Bicarat, and required him to
a cardinalist air.

cardinal, and M. de Treville was informed that the king was busy and
swords may never leave their scabbards but in your majesty’s service.
“Wait, then, monsieur, wait,” said the king; “I will not detain you
his Eminence’s Guards who have sought a quarrel with your Musketeers?”
Jussac, Cahusac, Bicarat, and two other Guardsmen, who certainly did not
ignorant that the Musketeers, who belong to the king and nobody but the
“You are right, Treville; but they were not alone, your Musketeers. They
“One hardly a young man; but who, however, behaved himself so admirably

“Brave young man!” murmured the king.
“I will see this young man, Treville--I will see him; and if anything
“You understand, Treville--an edict is still an edict, it is forbidden
That evening the three Musketeers were informed of the honor accorded
who was very expert in all bodily exercises, passed with d’Artagnan to



produced more effect upon the young man.
only to deal with an apprentice Musketeer. Never mind; be content, I

soon have completed his work with a third blow, when the noise which
which belonged to the Red Duke, as Aramis had called him, often took
hotel to punish the insolence of M. de la Tremouille’s domestics in
affair of yesterday, and the two will pass off together.”
his love of sport, and set out after dinner.”

He repaired, therefore, immediately to his hotel, and caused himself to
I am well informed, and all the fault is with your Musketeers.”
“Perfectly.”
on seeing these two noble lords who came to visit him, endeavored to
convalescence, took leave of M. de la Tremouille, returned to his hotel,
with the four young men in the antechamber. The king had not yet
courtiers from ranging themselves along his pathway. In royal
of ten minutes you do not see me come out, return to my hotel, for it
sometimes take one of his courtiers to a window and say, “Monsieur

preface--a sort of excitation to encourage himself--and that he had now
demand it of you.”
this?”

himself. What do you say to that?”


“At any hour you will.”

Chesnaye, who informed him that they had not been able to find M. de la
was ready to offer you my excuses. Since I have the good fortune to meet
for these are things which a king cannot say for himself.”
at nine I expect a visit. Go, Monsieur Duke, and return often. Come in,
renew his company in three weeks, and I to put the edicts in force in
boy! Do you mean to say that it was he who bestowed that severe thrust

expectation of seeing his Majesty, he had gone to his three friends
“Oh, yes; I am,” added the king, taking a handful of gold from La
“Oh, sire!” cried the four companions, with one voice, “we would allow
The cardinal, as his Majesty had said, was really furious, so furious
advised him to order a good repast at the Pomme-de-Pin, Porthos to
this place was already taken by a compeer named Mousqueton, and when
Athos, on his part, had a valet whom he had trained in his service in a
misanthropic remarks, was very disagreeable to him. His reserve, his
must render him that justice, whether anybody listened to him or not. He



pockets, got together all his jewels, purses, aiguillettes, and gold
but letters and papers--love letters and family papers, no doubt.
With regard to d’Artagnan, we know how he was lodged, and we have
ignorant of it.

handkerchief you saw had not been given to me, but it had been forgotten
moment I have absolutely nothing to do.”
the meanwhile, he looked upon Athos as an Achilles, Porthos as an Ajax,
As to Aramis, he never played. He was the worst Musketeer and the most
received thirty sous per day, and for a month he returned to his
theological studies, inspire your servant, Bazin, a mild, religious man,
made if you remain with me, and I am too good a master to allow you to
duty of one with remarkable punctuality. He went on guard because he
In the meanwhile the promises of M. de Treville went on prosperously.

good grace and who succeeded--as he said, by selling some theological
their lackeys, were seen haunting the quays and Guard rooms, picking up
lasted him for two months, and to the cornet’s, who performed wonders;
from their purses to their lives; four men always supporting one

other, as if to make a preliminary acquaintance, after which d’Artagnan


confidence in you. I believe, then, that it is not on account of any

“But how do you know all this?”
is by everybody.”

“In the queen’s name?”



“Yes, I have received--”

me, I am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct, and if, as I told
D’Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, he


“I am comfortably off, monsieur, that’s all; I have scraped together
“It is he!” cried d’Artagnan and the citizen at the same time, each
the stranger, as well as the apparition of the beautiful foreigner, to
They understood, then, from the few words which escaped from d’Artagnan,

found the reunion complete.
“The Bible,” said Aramis, “makes our belief in them a law; the ghost of
his head through the half-open door in order to catch some fragments of
“But come, what is this about?” asked Porthos.
connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought the wine

than his.”
to play him a sharp turn, I vow that I would voluntarily risk my head in


“This doctor has a niece,” continued Aramis.
see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday at the same time that I
“All at once, a tall, dark gentleman--just like yours, d’Artagnan.”

that the dress of a Musketeer--”
“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “do not let us lose our time in

is prudence.”
“Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders we have
“It seems, nevertheless--”
me--of a Musketeer! To prison with him! Gentlemen, once more, take him

The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity of
“Well, I am in a maze,” said Porthos; “do YOU approve of what d’Artagnan
stretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with one voice the
The invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days; as soon as

this last circumstance was not striking, as the queen since her marriage
persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: “Has Madame Bonacieux


“Pardon, gentlemen--par--” murmured the voice, which could now only be
“I am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner,” cried
The knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young man before
only one of the officers was armed, and even he defended himself for
the poor woman reclined where she had been left, half-fainting upon an

“Oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and I hope to prove to you that you have
“What has he done, madame?” said d’Artagnan. “I believe that his only
“Ah, his name? I do not know that.”
“So far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, and above
“Oh, no, poor dear man! I knew very well that he was incapable of
fly! Let us save ourselves.”
asked d’Artagnan.
“Ah, bah!” said d’Artagnan; “you have at some wicket of the Louvre a
serve the king and be agreeable to the queen. Dispose of me, then, as a


interval, and lighter.
“And what shall I command him?”

assured himself, by having it twice repeated, of the accurate address,

“Pardon me, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, who had profited by the moment
he related to him what he had heard of the projects of the cardinal with

gravity over her pleasing features, it might be surmised that she was
sentiments by the solidity of their gifts.
times, considered himself at Paris as on a campaign, neither more nor
head do not make an ugly woman pretty, but they make a pretty woman

thought nothing about him in any way; or that if he did think of him, it
send Planchet with a request that he would come instantly to the
delightful weather. D’Artagnan was passing along a lane on the spot
but by the smallness of the form, the hesitation of the walk, and the
the road, one of which was in a pavilion parallel to that which Aramis
which had fixed the irresolution of the nocturnal seeker, or whether
But to the great astonishment of d’Artagnan, the shutter remained
seeing in the dark.
his friend who held this dialogue from the interior with the lady of the
pocket, and exchanged it for that which had just been shown to her. Then
important affair to a woman of twenty-five! Love.

perceiving it was d’Artagnan, she uttered a cry of joy, “Oh, it is you,

“No.”
“--since she lodges with him.”
“Give me your arm, then.”


“How are they called who follow others in spite of them?”
all you wish if you allow me to accompany you where you are going.”
half laughing, half trembling, and both gained the top of Rue de la
“What could they take from me? I have not a penny about me.”
devotion and sympathy in my heart?”
tell you. Have no more concern about me; I exist no longer for you, any
truth.”
“You speak very suddenly of love, monsieur,” said the young woman,


“Ah, I was quite sure you were a good and brave young man,” said Mme.
your curiosity?”
“No, I use your generosity, that’s all. But be of good cheer; with

gained the angle of the street, he turned. The door had been opened, and

“Arrested! Athos arrested! What for?”
them who I am, and they cannot fail to let me go.’”
“But they may come any moment, for you left word that I awaited them?”
when I set about it. It is all in beginning. Besides, I am a Picard.”

As he gained the top of the Rue Guenegaud, he saw two persons coming out
They took the bridge. That was d’Artagnan’s road, as he was going to the
for having delivered her from the men in black, who wished to carry her
deceived in one of his conjectures.
“With Madame! You do not know her,” replied the stranger.

was jealous. You know what it is to love, my Lord. Pardon me, and then
Louvre by the wicket of the Echelle without any interference.
12 GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
generally closed at night. The door yielded. Both entered, and found
points of his character was the search for adventures and a love of
for her arrest, would have been executed three days earlier.
rule other men could not reach him, he went straight to the object he

incomparable.
Anne of Austria took two steps forward. Buckingham threw himself at her
risk of my honor. I see you to tell you that everything separates
an ingratitude. For tell me, where can you find a love like mine--a love
fault with the duke for having so well preserved her portrait in his
beautiful night it was? How soft and perfumed was the air; how lovely
grouped around me on that fatal evening; but, my Lord, you saw the queen
“Yes, but calumny seized upon all those follies in which I took no part,
happy for an instant. Thousands of men, it is true, will have to pay for
in spite of herself, by the expression of so profound a passion.
presentiment that I should shortly die.” And the duke smiled, with a
“In the left side, was it not, and with a knife?” interrupted


“Yes.”

the same precautions and the same good luck, conducted him out of the

interrogated in their cells; but they did not do so with M. Bonacieux.
penetrating, and an expression of countenance resembling at once the
for ministers to come--deeds and power which none could thwart with
feelings we have just enumerated. Bonacieux indeed reflected on what had
“You must, nevertheless, have committed a crime, since you are here and


I have waited for my wife at the wicket of the Louvre to escort her
“That is to say,” cried Bonacieux, who saw he had taken a false step,

Bonacieux--lamentations to which, besides, they must have been pretty
to embrace them both.

pardon.”

“Not the least in the world,” replied Bonacieux.

think so?’ My guards exclaimed that they were sure of it. I did not wish
scarcely nineteen or twenty, and this gentleman must be thirty at least.

“Bah!” said Athos to the commissary, “if you have no more need of me,

“But that is not an answer.”
pavement, that was all; but, true Parisian as he was, Bonacieux could
cries that the officer told him that if he continued to deafen him thus,
were coming to meet him. When he was within twenty paces of it, he heard
The carriage, which had been stopped for a minute, resumed its way,
He remained on the bench, with his back leaning against the wall and his

with arms offensive and defensive, and in which there was already a
This man was Armand Jean Duplessis, Cardinal de Richelieu; not such as

Bastille. From time to time the man by the chimney raised his eyes from


Monsieur the Commissary, and I no longer have them.”
“At one o’clock this morning she had not returned.”

“Did you go into these houses with her?”


Five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of the
deceived. This is quite another man, and does not resemble him at all.

“Madame de Lannoy, who is devoted to your Eminence, as you know.”
“Where?”
“She then arose, and with altered voice, ‘Ladies,’ said she, ‘wait for
“Only Donna Estafania.”
“And she came back without this casket?”
“And then the queen?”
is for the best.”

apartment.
to find linen drapers.”
vulgar a being as Bonacieux, did not the less enjoy it for an instant;
purse, fearing, doubtless, that this pretended gift was but a
Eminence.”
Bonacieux’s cries were no longer audible, “Good!” said he, “that man
woman left last night, and the man this morning.”
“What man?” asked the cardinal.
journey.”

circumstance. As to Aramis, he had asked for leave of absence for five
We were present at the scene in which the two captives were confronted
gain over men of the sword; but the name of M. de Treville, and that of
who in affairs of intrigue mistrusted women infinitely more than men.


Majesty concerning these gownsmen.”




“In the house in which the judicial inquiry was made,” continued the
“Well,” said the cardinal, “everybody seems to have passed the evening
“At half past ten--an hour after the event.”
is so in the part of it inhabited by Monsieur d’Artagnan, for I can
“That concerns your Majesty more than me,” said the cardinal. “I should
The expression was imprudent; but M. de Treville launched it with
that Monsieur the Cardinal will end by accusing me. It is best to

prisoner thus, we shall never know the truth.”
“The right of pardoning only applies to the guilty,” said Treville, who
Treville bowed very respectfully, with a joy that was not unmixed with


“To conspire, no doubt, with your enemies, the Huguenots and the
“And I am sure that he came for quite another purpose, Monsieur

“Who, I believe, is the mainspring of all this, I confess,” said the
terrible disclosure, what a fearful scandal!”




prevent a rupture.”

believed, had begun by according to the cardinal that sentiment which
politeness, only stopping before the queen. “Madame,” said he, “you are

them, and the superior, to whom he had confided this misfortune, wishing
The monks had no longer an instant of repose. By day they did nothing
Austria, stimulated the judges in the affair of Calais, encouraged the

When the chancellor had opened and shut twenty times the drawers of the

“I will give it to none but the king, monsieur,” said Anne.
“What horror!” cried the queen.
Anne of Austria, from whose eyes at the same instant sprang tears of
from her bosom and held it out to the keeper of the seals.
read it rapidly.

and these never-ending labors. I say that according to all probability I
me, sire, to be her enemy; although your Majesty can bear witness that I
they may be placed, and whatever peril I may incur in acting severely

birthday and with which she has since had no occasion to adorn herself.”

king replied that he must consult the cardinal upon that head.
Richelieu counted on his fingers, and said to himself, “She will arrive,
Majesty the evening before the fete that you should like to see how her
were excellent, being better informed than himself, even upon what was
accusation.
diamond studs which I gave you on your birthday. That is my answer.”
“You will appear at this ball?”
“But on what day will this ball take place?” asked Anne of Austria.

The queen made a curtsy, less from etiquette than because her knees were
the misfortune which threatened her and the abandonment in which she was
her trouble she did not at first recognize the young woman who had been
This expression sprang from the very bottom of the heart, and, like the


neither love nor hatred for anybody. He will do anything I wish. He will

Mme. Bonacieux blushed.


furniture broken and the closets nearly emptied--justice not being one
Rochefort had made him, ample subjects for reflection, and as everybody
above her position--Mme. Bonacieux had remained insensible to vulgar

crime, as you were not guilty of any intrigue, as you, in short, knew
“Yes, that first, and other things afterward.”

“A thousand pistoles, perhaps.”

“The cardinal?” cried Mme. Bonacieux. “Have you seen the cardinal?”

“Yes, madame; and as his servant, I will not allow you to be concerned
you serve the party of those who maltreat your wife and insult your

“Yes; but that abduction had for its object the betrayal of my mistress,
with politics, do you--and still more, with cardinalist politics? Why,
“I have told you. You must depart instantly, monsieur. You must
“What matters it, if you avoid them?”

particularly such as, like you, Monsieur Bonacieux, have conversed with
“It is of no use for you to know anything about it,” said the young
growing late, I will come back and reconduct you to the Louvre.”
“Not the least in the world.”
for this!”
husband.”
“A thousand things. In the first place, that, unfortunately, your


“Well, reveal your secret to him, and ask him whether, however

Mme. Bonacieux looked at the young man, restrained for a minute by a
am taken while accomplishing the orders you give me, I will die sooner




I to justify it if I am here?”
gentleman.”
It was the man of Meung.



“On the contrary,” said d’Artagnan, “we shall hear better.”
“Without speaking to anyone but yourself?”

it, she abandoned to him.
“Be satisfied,” replied Bonacieux; “my wife adores me, and there is yet
The stranger went out.
continuing to call, his voice being heard fainter and fainter as he went
Mme. Bonacieux followed him with her eyes, with that long, fond look

countenance, the worthy captain plainly perceived that something new was





“Without confiding to them the secret which I am not willing to know?”
first write your request to Dessessart. Perhaps you had a spy at your

excellent man, whom he had always found worthy, loyal, and great.

“Pack up all you want for a journey of a fortnight, and follow me.”
“I saw her.”

discretion of ‘the doctor’s niece.’”
Aramis called Bazin, and, after having ordered him to join them at
“Not even to Athos or Porthos?”




“Is this, then, a campaign upon which we are now entering?”

“And, now, when are we to go?” asked Athos.
“To Calais,” said d’Artagnan; “that is the most direct line to London.”
chance, be betrayed by gentlemen; but it is almost always sold by
me. Instead of taking the waters of Forges, I go and take sea waters; I
“I agree to it, too,” said Porthos, “if d’Artagnan approves of it.
20 THE JOURNEY
these noble companions of the soldier, would have betrayed the most



shoulder, and Mousqueton another ball which lodged in the fleshy part
“I would rather have had a hat,” said d’Artagnan. “Mine was carried away
with less interruption; but at Crevecoeur, Aramis declared he could

They had just prepared their beds and barricaded their door within, when

senseless, with his head split by a blow with a pitchfork.
passed the night in the inn, and were then settling their bill with the
off!”
“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, “I saw one fall at each of his two shots,

sail, “but this morning came an order to let no one leave without
“At a quarter of a league from the city. Look, you may see it from
likewise, I wish to beg you to render me a service.”

“Well, then, I wish that order of which you are bearer, seeing that I
manage the master.”
to be dead, or at least insensible, and went toward him for the purpose
which leads men to destroy each other for the interests of people who

of the worthy functionary.

“Nothing more easy.”

The vessel was quite ready to sail, and the captain was waiting on the
on board. It was time; for they had scarcely sailed half a league, when
the harbor of Dover, and at half past ten d’Artagnan placed his foot on
master instantly.
“The young man who one evening sought a quarrel with him on the Pont
the background.
“From her Majesty, as I think.”

he heard from the mouth of the young man to his own remembrances, he was
which indicated not more than twenty years.
fully appreciated; but he had the satisfaction of seeing three or four

me. The queen gave them to me, the queen requires them again. Her will
“They have been stolen,” replied the duke, “and it is the cardinal who

But although the jeweler had been mentioned first, it was the secretary
“Will that be the answer,” replied the secretary, smiling, “which he
“How so?”
true; but what signifies that? I obeyed my love; and have I not been
without hesitation said, “Fifteen hundred pistoles each, my Lord.”
“Impossible, my Lord! There is no one but myself can so execute them
its indemnification, here is, in addition to the price of the studs, an
any pretense but his VALET DE CHAMBRE, Patrick. We need not add that the
bound for France should leave port, not even the packet boat with
“The casket would encumber you. Besides, the casket is the more precious
in the service of the King and Queen of France, and form part of the



find, in the same way, four relays on your route. If you will give at
hope.”
d’Artagnan fancied he perceived on board it the woman of Meung--the same
the stable, where a saddled horse awaited him, and asked him if he stood

“That of Rouen; but you will leave the city on your right. You must stop
He left his address as he had done before, and set off again at the same

king’s Guards, followed by two officers and several archers of that
At six in the evening the guests began to come. As fast as they entered,
king, who was passing through the streets which led from the Louvre to
by M. de Liancourt, by M. de Baradas, by the Comte de Cramail, and by
it was remarked that, like the king, she looked dull and even weary.
of his doublet scarcely tied. He went straight to the queen, and in an
The voice of the king was tremulous with anger. Everybody looked and
both of them had spoken so low that everybody, out of respect, withdrew
I very much doubt, count them, sire, and if you only find ten, ask her
distant as they were from the queen, they could not count the studs. The
of leaving his lady, to advance eagerly toward the queen.
The king called the cardinal.
the chamber in which she had dressed, and where she was to take off her
precaution, which was in fact taken rather against others than against
he was under the command of a power which he must blindly obey, and


The sound of voices diminished by degrees in the adjoining chamber. The
least resistance or objection, which proved that he was really in love.
whom he had sent home two hours before from the Hotel de Ville, telling
“I mean to say that when I came in, although I had the key of your
you. Be this evening about ten o’clock at St. Cloud, in front of the


the anxiety of the preceding night.
pleasure.”
“Monsieur shall see that upon occasion I have some left; only I beg

The conversation naturally fell upon the incarceration of the poor man.
wife, on her part, has sworn to me by all that’s sacred that she does
“And you have returned, have you not?” replied M. Bonacieux, giving to
that d’Artagnan did not perceive it any more than he had the momentary


“Amuse yourself well!” replied Bonacieux, in a sepulchral tone.

“Do you believe that the cardinal is as well posted as yourself, and
which means, ‘Beware of the enemy who makes you presents.”
“How?”
romantic imagination. Everything that savors of mystery charms them. So
wears it.”
“The devil!” said d’Artagnan, whom the positive tone of M. de Treville
young man, rely upon one who has been thirty years at court. Do not lull
“My mistress above all,” repeated he, mechanically; “and why her rather


“The advice is good, monsieur, and tomorrow I will set out.”

“I don’t think they can be in need of any. We left Paris, each with
Neither of them had returned. Their lackeys likewise were absent, and

into the house had placed on my guard--I did not lose a movement of his
matter shall be categorically explained to us.”
hotel, I will come and take you.”

lonely and dark, he drew softly nearer, so that when they entered the
afraid?”
“Because you are a coward, Planchet.”
shadow, and was soon trotting by his side.
cold, that chills bring on rheumatism, and that a lackey who has the

He gained the place appointed, and as no signal had been given him by
middle of the night; but each of those strokes, which made up the

Eleven o’clock sounded.

some bloody spots staining the cloth and the curtains. He hastened to
that lovers like to snatch from a pretty hand.


no doubt seen all, and could tell its tale. The gate of the enclosure
the light from a miserable lamp which burned in the corner had shone
light of the lamp had seen the disorder of the chamber.
one of your words shall escape from my heart.”
word of what you may see or what you may hear (for you will look and you
care of his horses, the lackey held the saddlehorses. All at once great
D’Artagnan, entirely overcome by this terrible story, remained

“Oh, he was not a gentleman, I’ll answer for it; besides, he did not
carried her off. His mind was torn by doubt, grief, and despair.
environs of the spot on which this sad event had passed, he would,


his Eminence, a league off.”
pressed his hand kindly, wishing him a pleasant journey.
is a mask; and however well made the mask may be, with a little
when a man possesses a young and pretty wife, he has no need to seek
Then a sudden idea crossed the mind of d’Artagnan. That little stout
me that if my boots need a sponge, your stockings and shoes stand in
extreme means, force the mercer to open his teeth and let his secret
“Thanks, Monsieur Bonacieux,” said d’Artagnan, emptying his glass, “that
“Oh! I give you a hundred, I give you a thousand times to guess,
“The captain of the cardinal’s Guards?”
to beg you to follow him to the Palais-Royal*.”
this interview.’”

“PARDIEU! In the opposite direction to that which you said I was gone.
“Ah, monsieur, you may take my word when I tell you anything. I am a
“Do you think, then, monsieur, that we shall travel faster with two
St. Denis--a strategic maneuver which, having been executed with equal
alighted at the tavern of Great St. Martin, the same at which they had
D’Artagnan was therefore served with miraculous celerity. The regiment
“Your Lordship does me much honor,” said the host, “and I thank you
I was here only ten or twelve days ago. I was conducting some friends,

considerable advances; and this very morning the surgeon declared that

“We have asked him for money.”

hoped that he would have at least the kindness to grant the favor of his
of it, he would blow out the brains of the person who should be so


“And how do you know her?”

“Well, monsieur, do you know who this great lady is?”
“But how do you know all this?”

“Monsieur, I followed them from curiosity, so that I saw the combat
“So it was with Monsieur d’Artagnan this stranger meant to quarrel?”
with the money of the Duchess Coquenard.”
servant who this time put the letter in the post.”
answer for it. So, my dear host, be not uneasy, and continue to take all

Mousqueton, rising respectfully, yielded his place to him, and went to
Porthos seemed to breathe more freely.
“Oh, I don’t know; he had enough, and set off without waiting for the




modest air. “One only needs to be sharp, that’s all. I was brought up in
Huguenot. Now, he was accustomed to walk with his fowling piece on his
“Oh, of the most unfortunate kind, monsieur. One day he was surprised in

“But the wine,” said d’Artagnan, “who furnishes the wine? Your host?”

at each cast he caught the neck of the bottle in his running noose. I
breakfast, d’Artagnan will relate to us what has happened to him during
horses--one for himself, and one for each of his companions; then he
Porthos replied that in all probability his sprain would not permit him
D’Artagnan had said nothing to Porthos of his wound or of his
happiness he had missed, than from the fear he entertained that some
mountains, and landscapes are lost. It was as a prey to this


“No, monsieur, quite the contrary; but after his illness grace touched
old-fashioned taverns. But there was no getting at the place of sojourn
master would not retract. The union of physical pain with moral
would not, as Bazin said, terminate before night.
man, particularly when that young man is a Musketeer, had disappeared as
“So am I delighted to see you,” said d’Artagnan, “although I am not yet
what I see, I am led to believe that you are confessing to these
“I have not failed to do so, your Reverences,” replied the young man,

chair that he would have assumed in bed, and complacently examining his
“Which means,” resumed Aramis, that he might perfectly understand, “‘The
have confessed to these learned ecclesiastics, and that in all humility,
produced, and found his friend gaping enough to split his jaws.
HAND.”
All crossed themselves. D’Artagnan thought it was proper to follow this
“CERTES,” said Aramis, “I do justice to the beauties of this thesis; but
face the insinuations of the Pelagians and the semi-Pelagians.”

“No; but pray grant me that it is acting with an ill grace to offer to
his hands to make them white, “and then I made a certain RONDEAU upon it


“Mundane presumption!”
the highway, or that the birds of heaven have eaten the rest, AVES COELI
The two men in black rose, bowed to Aramis and d’Artagnan, and advanced
“Yes, efficacious grace has touched you, as that gentleman said just
“Granted; but if you please, let us not theologize, Aramis. You must


“I had been at the seminary from nine years old; in three days I should
will dare it myself.’ I really think I must have been frightened. I
and went to a ball given by a lady friend of mine and to which I knew my
then. Ladies,’ said the officer, ‘do not disturb yourselves; allow me
for a time. Athos, whose acquaintance I made about that period, and


the blood of a wounded hart.”
“Well?”
D’Artagnan smiled, but made no answer.
“What letter?” cried Aramis, eagerly.
“Hold! I must have lost it,” said the young man maliciously, pretending

garlic, and four bottles of old Burgundy.”

“No doubt. Nobody has a higher opinion of the courage and skill of Athos
“When do you mean to set out?”
upon such horses.”
“No, I have left off laughing, now that you speak French.”
they come, think only that one of the three is your property.”
Bazin sighed.
“Alas!” sighed Bazin. “I know it, monsieur; everything is turned
will go alone in search of Athos.”
“Oh, make yourself easy on that head,” replied Aramis. “You will find me
distinguished air of Athos, those flashes of greatness which from time
indefinable character of grandeur and grace. His hands, of which he took
falconry, and had one day when conversing on this great art astonished
then, was a very extraordinary man.
violent effort, was the share Athos furnished to the conversation. In
variations of chance with songs or oaths, Athos when he won remained as
spoke of the future. His secret, then, was in the past, as had often
remember how he cried, ‘On, d’Artagnan, on, I am taken’? And when he had
“Do you remember me?” said he to the host, who advanced to greet him.

recollect you. It was you who rode off at the moment I had that

“But once again, that gentleman--where is he? What has become of him? Is
Monsieur your friend (pardon for not calling him by the honorable name
wished to imprison him.”

understand, monsieur, we were disposed to do everything your friend
I should adore you as my patron saint!”
teach me to insult honorable gentlemen who took up their abode in my
“And not more than justice, either, you ass! Could you not perceive by
Athos to go into the cellar to satisfy these gentlemen; and he, as
and if he is too far gone in his madness, well, we will kill him!”
ashamed to draw back, and the angrier one descended the five or six
breakers!”
and my own. You shall soon have something to drink; I give you my word.”

of you.”

a burning fever.
Beyond the fortifications through which Athos had made a breach in order
his head.

had tried his strength to the utmost. D’Artagnan came to his relief with
pardon to every sin! You are gentlemen, and I am a poor innkeeper. You
“That purse contained sixty pistoles; where is it?”




“You always say TRIFLES, my dear Athos!” said d’Artagnan, “and that come
“I say that love is a lottery in which he who wins, wins death! You are

“Which has happened to you?”
Athos collected himself, and in proportion as he did so, d’Artagnan saw
Through the ingenuousness of her age beamed an ardent mind, not of the
supported her rank becomingly.”
Athos emptied at a single draught the glass he held in his hand.
“No less,” said Athos, as pale as a corpse. “But methinks I need wine!”
“PARBLEU!” said Athos. “But hold out your glass. Some ham, my boy, or we
worthy man, who had pretended to be a curate for the purpose of getting
to sleep.
four bottles of Burgundy carries with it to the brain, d’Artagnan, when

to remark, my dear friend, that everyone has his particular kind of
nightmare.”

“You are mistaken; I rode him nearly ten leagues in less than an hour
room, I saw one of our Englishman bargaining with a dealer for a horse,
have identified us in the day of battle. It was a pledge, a remembrance.
“What else have you done.”
“Your horse, seven against eight; a point short--you know the proverb.”


ILLIAD.
present day making him forget that of the preceding one.


ought, then, to have a good hand.”

to risk anything.”
Athos went in quest of the Englishman, whom he found in the stable,




the contrary, the hundred pistoles feed their master.”
“Nothing, nothing! Go on!”
D’Artagnan only required one reason to be satisfied. This last reason


“What is this?” said Aramis, on seeing them arrive. “Nothing but
Musketeer.”
“You will see,” continued Aramis, “that it breathes irreproachable
spread enough for four persons. This dinner consisted of meats nicely
same effect.”
“And I some lamb chops,” said Porthos.

“Gave him?” cried d’Artagnan.
their hilarity, he shared it vociferously according to his custom.
reckoning Mousqueton’s wound, for which I had to have the surgeon twice
“Well, then it appears that we are the Croesuses of the society. How



the remains of which were abandoned to Mousqueton, Bazin, Planchet, and



obtain no intelligence of her. M. de Treville had spoken of her to the
performed my duty without the expense of an outfit.”
heaved sighs enough to soften the stones.
announced on his part the most triumphant resolutions. As d’Artagnan
Porthos leaned, a sort of ripe beauty, rather yellow and rather dry, but
doubt, a great lady--for she had behind her a Negro boy who had brought
turned round toward her. Porthos paid no attention. Nevertheless, he
being not far from that locality.
undeceived. When she was only about three steps from him, he turned his




Porthos regretted that he had not at once made the lady of the red
placed reliance upon your friendship--I was near dying of my wounds at
“Monsieur Porthos, be generous!”
Duchesse--but I won’t repeat her name, for I am incapable of

few paltry crowns from them. Oh! If you were a duchess, a marchioness,
gone too far, “you must not take the word literally. I am not precisely
“Now, Monsieur Porthos, once more, and this is the last! Do you love me
“Not so; I speak frankly to you. No object affects me; and I even feel
procurator’s wife.

“You are a woman of precaution, I see, my dear Madame Coquenard,” said

appetizing appearance.
that time in a fair way to be equipped.

“I? not at all!” said d’Artagnan. “I am only curious to unravel the
“Amuse yourself with Milady, my dear d’Artagnan; I wish you may with all
bottle he had just brought.
search of Milady he at the same time went in search of Constance.

can from his conversation whether his master is dead.”

“For my master?” replied Planchet, astonished.
“For me?” said d’Artagnan; “are you sure of that?”
is the good Monsieur de Wardes? He is not dead, then?”
The conversation between Milady and the cavalier was so animated that
other door, and taking off his hat respectfully, said, “Madame, will you
of the coach window. “Why does not he go about his business?”
herself back in her carriage, and called out coolly to the coachman, “Go
“Well, monsieur,” said he, “you appear to be more stupid than I am, for



arrival made them acquainted with the situation.


“You played very willingly with us without knowing our names,” said
“Yes, monsieur,” said the Englishman, bowing.
The Englishman looked at Athos, believing that he jested, but Athos did
practicing in a fencing school.
man ended by fairly taking to his heels, and disappeared amid the
upon his face.



This greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
only fear was that Milady would recognize in him the man of Meung and of


alone, and as it was nearly eight o’clock he took the young man with
was I who insulted him, and although I am an Englishman. Thank him,
omitting a single detail. Milady listened with the greatest attention,
animated her countenance. She bit her handkerchief with her beautiful
The conversation took a cheerful turn. Milady appeared to have entirely
D’Artagnan took leave of Milady, and left the saloon the happiest of
D’Artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudent for a young
Milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bit her lips;

love. No; a more material interest stirred his blood. He was about at
attentions which “the harder one is, the more they please,” as old
understood, for a procurator’s wife--he hoped to see a household of a
A shorter clerk came behind the first, a taller clerk behind the second,

Porthos favorably. Words might be heard at a distance through all these
slender body was concealed, was brisk and dry. His little gray eyes
“By the female side, I believe?” said the procurator, maliciously.
but withdrawing his anxious look from the chest and fixing it upon
This succor, which came to Porthos at the moment in which he was
keep such gourmands! They look like shipwrecked sailors who have not
Mme. Coquenard smiled, and upon a sign from her everyone eagerly took
“One may see that you love your family, Madame Coquenard,” said the

But the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit, and their lugubrious
topaz.

Upon a look from the procurator, accompanied by a smile from Mme.



“Why, they may amount to--“, said Porthos, who preferred discussing the

must have the appointments complete, as they include objects which a
“but that is doing things in lordly style, my friend.”
“There remains the valise,” added Porthos.
Madame uttered fresh sighs. Moliere had not written his scene in

gateway of the hotel; but this time the pretty Kitty was not contented





“Monsieur El Comte de Wardes.”
d’Artagnan became very pale; he was wounded in his SELF-love: he thought
“Well, then, instead of pitying me, you would do much better to assist
“The first is that my mistress will never love you.”

constantly meeting him in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
I should give you a proof of that love which you doubt?”
SOUBRETTE I ever saw!”
then, opening quickly the door of a large closet instead of that leading
her mistress.
“What will you do with him, madame?”
D’Artagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suave creature
A cold sweat broke from d’Artagnan’s brow. Why, this woman was a

“That’s exactly the reason I won’t go,” said d’Artagnan.
Bonacieux; but the poor girl swore upon the crucifix to d’Artagnan that
ill-humor, had no doubt that it was lack of an answer from M. de Wardes
Milady could not at all comprehend the silence of the Comte de Wardes,
soldier.
young man’s countenance for an instant.
Madame, Until the present moment I could not believe that it was to me

surprise, shame, and terror, to triumph over her. He might fail, but
Milady will then turn you out of doors, and you know she is not the
D’Artagnan replied in such a manner that Kitty remained in her great
had been no fixed meeting between them. They dined apart from one
was asked, and even then he required to be asked twice.
embarrassment, Mousqueton entered. He came to request his master to
“What do you want with me, my friend?” said Aramis, with that mildness
“Has he sent no particular message for me?”
Englishman’s pistoles, which were our legitimate property--what do you
“Oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account I gave you advice, which
and there were in the plan which our lover had devised for Milady, he
“I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis. Is that your name, monsieur?”
the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he
the bearer brings you; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman,
“Golden dreams!” cried Aramis. “Oh, beautiful life! Yes, we are young;
forgot to announce him, he announced himself.
become equal to Monsieur de Voiture and Monsieur de Benserade. I like
doublet.
And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket to answer

carcass is not worth eighteen livres. But how did this horse come into

friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate Porthos. He, having

she guessed the reproaches that awaited her there; but she was
“There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, Monsieur Porthos,” said
“Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!” cried she. “Stop, and
“You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know what they are;
“You pardon me?”
last arrived.

heard him enter, but she did not raise her head. The young man went to
all to this one, to change the program which he had laid out in advance.

he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when Kitty




“Your Milady,” said he, “appears to be an infamous creature, but not the
“Yes,” said Athos, “magnificent. I did not think two sapphires of such a

that I shall have no head to converse with you. Don’t ask me for
“And you--sold it?” asked d’Artagnan, hesitatingly.
this woman terrifies me.”
sleeplessness and sorrow.
Comte de Wardes
back to the Place Royale as fast as her legs could carry her.
air, but she could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her, and

expected him in vain.
particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a
understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might
orders. He did not dare to write for fear of not being able--to such
went out.
of repose, and I will withdraw.”
damn himself for that smile. There was a moment at which he felt
“Have I any need to tell you so? Have you not perceived it?”
fall in love with me, by chance, this fair inconstant; and will she be




know these lovers. They are men who do nothing for nothing.”


“Yes.”
“Alas, do you love nothing else in me?” asked d’Artagnan.
believed in the tenderness of Milady; he almost believed in the crime of


count before witnesses. All this was answered by an expression of
“Which means that you now hesitate?”



and write Milady a long letter, in which he would confess to her that he
last irresolution in the heart of d’Artagnan. He recalled to his mind
As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it. Jealousy, fury,
Wardes, and asked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved for
think about duels and sword thrusts.
afraid, dear Monsieur d’Artagnan?”
d’Artagnan about to leave her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her
in your turn, satisfy me of yours. Is it not so?”
Milady looked at her lover in silence. The pale light of the first rays

really cannot tell what you mean.”
“If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it, but you love
“You gave de Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very room, did
“What next? what next?”

secret she concealed even from her maid with such care, the secret of
wild countenance, those terribly dilated pupils, those pale cheeks, and
screaming in a formidable way.
unceasingly maneuvered to gain this point, was not at more than three
“But you can’t go out so,” said Kitty; “you are naked.”
her chamber.

of the cloak. At sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor

real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly seized his hand, crying,
“Athos,” said d’Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and



“She is capable of anything or everything. Did you ever see her
“She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes
shadow.”
Grimaud entered.
me. It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is
“Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it. With
crowns for me.”
Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. You shall take half the

“Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty,” said d’Artagnan; “be at ease, my girl.

“Oh, Porthos’s duchess is dressed by her husband’s clerks,” said
“And I, also,” said d’Artagnan, “I also. I shall always love you; be
Kitty will tell nothing; will you, Kitty? You understand, my dear girl,”
“Exactly so.”
at his door.”




discussing the price with the dealer, Athos was counting out the money

“Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to
At four o’clock the four friends were all assembled with Athos. Their
writing but once, the memory of it remained at the bottom of his heart.

the part of a gentleman.”
“Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure,” said Aramis, with his mild and
bosom.”
“I will go to the second after attending the first,” said d’Artagnan.

with three Musketeers behind him; if we see a close carriage, at all
“I have no horse,” said d’Artagnan; “but that is of no consequence, I
“Therefore I only purchased two,” said Aramis.


“Here are forty double pistoles, my dear friend,” said d’Artagnan,
A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the end of the Rue

Mme. Coquenard had met Porthos and seen what a superb appearance he made
find him, let him be where he might.
Almost instantly a female head was put out at the window, with two
He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for the poor woman
His three companions joined him. All had plainly seen a woman’s head
was peculiar to him, “perhaps sooner than you wish.”

Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man was not without a
overflow.”
recognized d’Artagnan, and knowing that it was he who had wounded
He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered a library, and

“Monsieur,” said the cardinal, “are you a d’Artagnan from Bearn?”
“You came through Meung, where something befell you. I don’t very well
the Musketeers.”
souvenir she gave you.”
remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden to come to me,
“That,” continued the cardinal, “arose not only from a feeling of
prudent, which is still better. I like men of head and heart. Don’t be
“There are no extravagant hopes but for fools, monsieur, and you are a
“But it appears to me that my Guards--mine--are also his Majesty’s
“I have here a whole pile which concerns you. I know you to be a man of
received here and ill regarded there if I accepted what Monseigneur
myself; at present I shall appear to sell myself.”
“I will try to do so, monseigneur,” replied the Gascon, with a noble
a magnificent suit of armor he was to wear, “and on our return, well--we
required, Athos would no more give him his hand--Athos would renounce
into his guards with the rank of ensign, and that he had refused.
proposing to set out the day after. M. de Treville contented himself

him a sign to dismount and come to her. Porthos was magnificent; his
relatives, about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with

livery had waiting for them.
The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were
of Europe.

diamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the three Musketeers
also was pursuing a private vengeance. Buckingham could not under any
Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left a little orphan girl eighteen
had been held; but on rising from his Bed of Justice on the

love, the only woman he could have loved was Mme. Bonacieux; and Mme.
of the queen; but the favor of the queen was at the present time an
when, by the last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw the barrel
himself upon the ground. At the same instant the gun was fired, and he
He immediately, therefore, took to his heels and ran toward the camp,
well-furnished purse in his pocket.

relinquished.
the part of his superior, for fear he might be mistaken; but this
before. The matter was to ascertain, by reconnoitering, how the enemy
Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprang forward, and two
d’Artagnan perceived that the two soldiers had disappeared.
stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless imprudence.
The young man turned quickly round, for this attack could not have come
d’Artagnan’s trick, they neglected to reload their guns.
Meantime d’Artagnan had thrown himself upon the other soldier, attacking
are, and who may hope for everything, being handsome and brave, as you

“That you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade has in his
believed that woman dead?” asked d’Artagnan.


Then he began to search. A leather pocketbook, a purse, in which was

“Yes, yes!” murmured d’Artagnan; “that’s the place--Milady’s own
Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible to find Mme.
preserver; but d’Artagnan, who had no longer a motive for staying so
In fact, d’Artagnan believed that he might be tranquil, as one of his
a horse he would set forward.
But one morning at the commencement of the month of November everything

D’Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wine to the
towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked the bottles; and Brisemont, which was
the cause of this noise. Cries of “Live the king! Live the cardinal!”
the young man, turning to the two Guards, whom he introduced to his
“We sent you wine?”

“Yes, your purveyor, Godeau--the purveyor of the Musketeers.”

“Look you, my friends!” cried d’Artagnan, “a horrible suspicion crosses


this adventure. Great personages may have had a hand in what you have
comprehend that such a feast can only be very dull after what has taken
“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan, “I commit the corpse of this poor devil to


to her: ‘Peace or war! My word as a gentleman never to say anything of



that it is the queen who has made choice of the convent for her?”

43 THE SIGN OF THE RED DOVECOT
supported the Duc d’Angouleme, whom the king, at his instigation, had
English from the Isle.
best to put an end to the affair, and gave the necessary orders for a
Te Deums were chanted in camp, and afterward throughout France.

be lost, and France, perhaps, with him. All this must be prepared

M. de Treville, they obtained from him special permission to be absent
appearing to deliberate whether they should continue their route or go

Athos the post of speaker.

“We are gentlemen, monseigneur,” said Athos; “require our parole, and
brave and loyal gentlemen, and that confidence may be placed in you.
what has happened; for you might learn it from others, and upon a false
“I, monseigneur?” said Athos. “I did not even draw my sword, but I took
endeavored to appease my comrades, when one of these wretches gave me a
“Force her door!” said the cardinal, “and for what purpose?”
heads we would not be guilty of a falsehood.”
I wish to know; follow me.”
rapid words with the cardinal; after which he mounted his horse, and set



“Milady!” murmured Athos.
men, whom you will find at the door on going out, will serve you as
Athos took advantage of this moment to tell his two companions to fasten
confidence, but to present yourself frankly and loyally as a


wittily turned, with a plan of the garden and portraits of the principal
inasmuch as it proves not only that her Majesty can love the enemies of
“The duke is in love to madness, or rather to folly,” replied Richelieu,
“If he persists--” His Eminence made a pause, and resumed: “If he
“Your Eminence means, I presume, the knife stab in the Rue de la
“Well?” said Milady.



that the torture may make him say things he remembers, and even things


“Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this
off, has sworn my death.”

mean,” replied the cardinal; “but I wish to please you, and see nothing
room.
about it to the cardinal’s esquire likewise. The rest concerns myself;



returned at a gallop to the inn, which was opened to him without
He entered the chamber and closed the door behind him. At the noise he


Milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring, and her eyes flashed
“I wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to your eyes, I have
his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discovered your infamous
Assassinate the Duke of Buckingham, or cause him to be assassinated--I
Athos was seized with a kind of vertigo. The sight of this creature, who
almost touched Milady’s forehead, and then, in a voice the more terrible


In one of those halts he heard the steps of several horses on the road.


course toward England.
come here instead of getting a little rest after a night spent in taking
“Yes.”
“Why, I think there were not many intruders. Yes, Athos, I know what you
They arrived at the drinking room of the Parpaillot. It was seven
quarrel or other, and we have no need of one just now. D’Artagnan, tell



“Yes, the wager!” said the light-horseman.
twisting his mustache, “that’s a fair bet, I hope.”
proposition.


it. But when once they passed the line of circumvallation and found
“Because we have very important matters to communicate to one another,

ourselves with glory. You see that everything is to our advantage.”

“Well, we shall find their muskets, their cartridges, and their flasks;
Athos pointed to the bastion.
that Grimaud gained by this momentary pantomime was to pass from the



duty, Athos allowed him to take a loaf, two cutlets, and a bottle of
imbeciles greatly resembling each other.”

“Villainous host!” cried he, “he has given us Anjou wine instead of

have to do with a very different number of people. What is it, Grimaud?

him, Athos arose carelessly, took the musket next to him, and drew near

addressing the soldiers and the pioneers, who, astonished at this
In fact, at the same instant four shots were fired, and the balls were

“She goes into England,” said Athos.
soldiers of the king.”
gave us some very fine horses.”
“But this creature must be a demon!” said Porthos, holding out his plate


and for fear he should feel lonely, he will send us to keep him company

d’Artagnan alone understood.
are equal.”
miracle.”
“Fire, then,” said Athos.
Arrived at the foot of the bastion, there were still more than a dozen

And the Musketeer, with his usual coolness, reseated himself before the
was an ally, and not an enemy. What you would now do amounts to
Porthos.”
camp? From here to Paris it is a hundred and forty leagues; before our
cardinal, will know your letter by heart, and you and your clever person
“You see, they are going to send a whole regiment against us,” said
If we go from this place we shall never find another so suitable. Ah,
“You comprehend?” said Porthos.
brother-in-law, as I think you told me, d’Artagnan?”



Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative, and pointed to a dozen bodies
enlarging. I am of d’Artagnan’s opinion; we have no time to lose in
enemy, even if that flag be but a napkin.”
through it, made the napkin really a flag. Cries were heard from the

“Oh, I comprehend now,” said the astonished Porthos.
“Or fifteen.”
“What is it, then?”

coming from a mistress, and consequently not being a love token,
at the camp; therefore, gentlemen, not a word more of this affair. We
Houdiniere, his captain of the Guards, to inquire what was going on.
“Yes, monseigneur.”
the morning, which was the talk of the whole camp. M. de Treville, who
same company.”
help of God, we shall henceforth pass for cardinalists.”
This was the price of the queen’s diamond.
Porthos had discovered the means, the diamond.
constantly seen Milady like a dark cloud hovering in the horizon.
boasted of the strength of Mousqueton, who was big enough to thrash four
“Not to be found!” cried Athos. “I know it well, so take Grimaud.”
upon the faults of people, and not upon their virtues. Monsieur Abbe,
“Well, my dear friend, add to his natural devotedness a good sum of
“Not at all,” cried d’Artagnan, who was anxious the matter should be
“Let us see,” said Athos, assuming in advance a critical look.
queen-mother! That’s ingenious,” said Athos.
over to Monsieur Abbe. That’s his province.”
“Lower! SACRE BLEU!” said Athos.
as if seeking for the word, and looked at Athos.
“And her husband found out that she had a fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?”

such a letter, and yet the chancellor draws up an official report very
in France. But the third time, which is the present, you may succumb.
“I have what is still better. I have the price;” and d’Artagnan threw
queen. Let us take some heed of the welfare of her dear Buckingham. That
“Ah, ah!” said Athos. “This clever person is your relative, then?”
past, of times present, and probably of times to come. He would
“To Mlle. Michon, seamstress, Tours.”
“Very well,” said d’Artagnan, “I consent to Bazin with all my heart, but
will reduce the sum to five thousand livres. We will each take a
money to him, then the glory, and then the danger.
interview with Lord de Winter; you have eight days to return--in all
moreover, terrified at the calm air of the Musketeer.

the bottom of his heart a partiality for the duke, took Planchet aside.
Musketeers, but otherwise as light-hearted as possible.
On the morning of the eighth day, Bazin, fresh as ever, and smiling,
with the four friends when the letter came.

“Well, pardieu!” said Aramis, “it was only this: I had a dream, and I
and the Swiss.
further, his confidence in the worthy Picard, at one time so great,
break a leg, and I am convinced a surgeon would give us more pain in
surveying it through a glass of chambertin.”
finally it came. The bars were filled with drinkers. Athos, who had
himself, and Porthos from time to time pulled a hair or two from his


d’Artagnan translated this for the others.


terrible consequences might result to herself from it, she implored the
that would be thirteen days lost--thirteen days, during which so many
with him, with diamonds and precious stones, his hat ornamented with a
camp of the Assyrians and beheld the enormous mass of chariots, horses,

During the examination of Milady by the officer, as may well be


perfect calmness. Nevertheless, they had not the power of convincing
upon this cloak, and placed himself beside her.
“Yes, madame,” replied the officer.

The young officer preserved silence.

the violence that is done me?”
young man, that Milady felt reassured.
bringing back her eyes with a most gracious smile to the young officer;
introduction into the lock of a key which the young man carried with
and packages, deposited them in a corner, and retired without speaking.
prisoner, what crime have I committed?”


“I am, then, your prisoner?”

with the cardinal had fallen into outside ears; but she could not

Lord de Winter adopted the same tactics as Milady, thinking that as his
“And you had no other object in coming to England but to see me?”
his eyes on those of Milady.
meaning concealed beneath your words?”
“And yet that is the most simple thing in the world, my dear sister.
“Himself. Ah, I can understand how the sight of him struck you,” replied
“Well, I reply that you shall be served to the height of your wishes,
“My first husband!” cried Milady, looking at Lord de Winter with eyes
wrists.
“Come!” said he. “I know you are accustomed to assassinate people; but I
“Oh, growl as much as you please,” cried Lord de Winter, “but don’t try
my precautions are taken. Not a penny of what I possess will pass into
“Yes, at present,” continued Lord de Winter, “you will remain in this

He went toward the door and opened it hastily.

hopes of salvation, to keep her safely for the chastisement she has
baron. “She is to correspond with nobody; she is to speak to no one but


mutineers. This execution quieted the ill-disposed, who resolved to


The cardinal could not drive from his mind the fear he entertained of
foreign to himself, but as we look for a fortunate chance. He continued
remained strong and healthy. Up to that time, whether from devotedness
Rochelle who had contrived to pass the royal lines--God knows how, such
other side of the sea.
Musketeer of the company of Treville, he drew near and looked at him in
received. This letter was so important that it made them forsake their
the talkative Gascon; and as he had already perceived that these men

preserved the noble calmness and coolness that never forsook him,
These words were pronounced with that imperturbable phlegm which
Athos allowed the cardinal to finish his sentence completely, and bowed
us with so few attendants.”
concealed as soon as you saw me coming.”

turned round as if to give an order to Cahusac and Houdiniere. Athos saw
where you are, finish your bottles, your game, and your letter. Adieu,

“I expected as much,” said Athos; “and that was why I threw myself
love with a woman whom the cardinal has caused to be shut up, and you
“You had only read a line or two,” said d’Artagnan; “read the letter
from her intended. I know that such viands pass with difficulty through
in a convent; she is at Bethune! Where is Bethune, Athos?”
same,” resumed he, after having clicked his tongue against his palate,
service you will have rendered us, you shall afterward drink this glass
ingenious idea of ripping up Grimaud, I think we may be pretty much at
We shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which we left her,
so strong.
many disgraces heaped upon her head, if not from him? He alone could

nature. But by degrees she overcame the outbursts of her mad passion;
place upon her countenance, so mobile and so expressive, she made it
ascertain the nature of the ground she had to work upon, by studying the
The order was executed.

upon an armchair which happened to be near the door, and waited without
“Ah, you are awake, madame,” he said; “then I have nothing more to do
you prefer, and in this respect your wishes will be complied with.”
“Well, what is it--what is going on here?” said he, in a jeering voice,
disheveled, that white skin, and that languishing look, have not yet
“Oh, I will be a match for you!” murmured Milady, between her teeth; “be
table, saw the glittering of a knife, rushed toward it and clutched it;

whom I can have no more influence than upon statues of bronze or
One expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner: “If I had
Anyone who had seen her sleeping might have said she was a young girl
She slept as a prisoner sleeps, rocked by his first hope.
“Would you like to have a physician called?” said the woman.
treatment you wish followed.”

watching her this burst of inward satisfaction.
spread.
words, YOUR MASS, at the disdainful smile with which he accompanied
Those two words, YOUR MASS, and a simple glance cast upon Felton,
when I shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith.”
accomplice in his persecutions, the accomplice in his heresies.”
“I mean to say that since we last met you have changed your religion.
“Oh, you need not avow this religious indifference, my Lord; your
victim who provokes his judge.
on the contrary; but you, weak fool, will not see them until it is too
and drank only water.
“Thou leavest thy servants, Lord, To see if they be strong; But soon
called: “Hold your tongue, madame! Your song is as dismal as a ‘De


that Felton was so dazzled that he fancied he beheld the angel whom he
at night.”
Felton had fallen; but there was still another step to be taken. He must
accustomed.
escape from his lips, and went out. Toward midday, Lord de Winter
well to be at liberty on that beach! You would like very well to be in a


committed, for me the guilty are sacred at the feet of God!”
abused, sir; but that is not the question. I only ask you one favor; and
death. Would to heaven! Of what consequence to me is imprisonment or


understand of whom I was speaking.”
“Do you know him, then?” asked Felton.
your knees! You shall shut the door that you may be certain I


lost--for the baron, who knows very well that I shall not kill myself,
“How, dear sister!” said Lord de Winter. “Did not you sentimentally

applied. She will receive five shillings per day for lodging and food’”.
affectation, but from terror. She believed the order ready for

care you shall not deprive me of mine. There only remains, then, the
Milady breathed again. She had still four days before her. Four days
stopped his march to listen to her.

entering, Milady leaped lightly to the ground, and tried to conceal
Felton turned his eyes toward the part of the wall of the apartment
Christians are forbidden to lie.”
“That I may relate my misfortunes for you to treat them as fables; that

I am guilty; but what name can you give it, what name will the Lord give
for themselves, and who ranges himself on the side of the strongest and
her by turns overcome with grief and threatening; to resist at once the
voice, to which on this occasion she communicated a terrible energy:
“Yes, yes!” said Felton, “I doubted, but now I believe.”
“Yes, yes!” said Felton, passing his hands over his brow, covered with
this strange creature, he could not detach his eyes from her eyes.
Hearing that voice, so sweet and suppliant, seeing that look, so timid

man took for doubt, but which, however, was nothing but observation, or


de Winter. “Choose Tyburn, madame. Believe me, the cord is more certain
send her she can harm nobody.”
d’Artagnan. A Puritan only adores virgins, and he adores them by
“Listen,” replied Felton, in a low voice. “I have just sent away the
death will be much more eloquent than my life, and the silence of the

transport of joy.
Milady had however achieved a half-triumph, and success doubled her
then, made a breach by her false virtue in the opinion of a man horribly
would sign it the more readily from its bearing a false name, and he

Then that which spurred her on additionally in the midst of all this was
beforehand in the thousand meshes of her inventive imagination.
At ten o’clock Felton came and placed the sentinel. Milady recognized
door, for you know that last night my Lord punished a soldier for having
“Zounds, Lieutenant!” said he; “you are not unlucky in being charged



agreed with the prisoner.
heaped upon me, and as my soul was not subdued they wished to defile my
utter inarticulate sounds, and irresistible faintness came over me. I
in vain to shake off the heavy darkness of the sleep from which I could


“All at once the noise of a door, turning on its hinges, made me start.
officer, whose soul seemed to hang on her lips, took in this strange



“And yet, notwithstanding these precautions, I remained for some time in
composed my repast; then I drew another glass of water from my
as I had only drunk half a glass of the water, I contended longer, and
that at this time I retained a consciousness of the danger that
immediately, and to fall into the arms of my persecutor.”
weak as I was, a long resistance, for I heard him cry out, ‘These
defense, it might at least serve for expiation.

forty-eight hours without eating or drinking.
substitution was made so carefully that my spies, if I had any, could
“At length I saw the lamp rise softly, and disappear in the depths of
“Then,” continued Milady, “then I collected all my strength; I recalled
my usual fatuity I doubted it; now I am convinced. Tomorrow you shall be
“However perfect master he was over himself, my persecutor allowed a

“At these words he retired. I heard the door open and shut, and I


“‘You?’ cried I. ‘You?’

suffered frightful torments. At times there passed before me clouds
requested of you?’


England!--it would be necessary to prove what tribunal had imposed it on
“Pardon! Pardon!” cried Felton, “oh, pardon!”

divined who he is?”

The soul of Milady was bathed in an infernal joy.
men it is not the sword that should be employed; it is the poniard.”
return Lord de Winter died, leaving me his sole heir. Whence came the
Portsmouth.”

“Oh, death, death!” said she, lowering her voice and her eyelids, “oh,
over! We are lost!”
without understanding what you said. I tried to open the door, but it
sword under his arm, stood in the doorway.
But the knife had fortunately, we ought to say skillfully, come in



time Milady stabbed herself, however short, the wound had closed. The

desire was to be left alone.
Milady smiled with joy. She was free now to give way to her transports
longer a weapon; and besides, I am on my guard. You had begun to pervert
on her lips, but rage in her heart.
All at once she heard a tap at her window, and by the help of a flash of

Milady shut the window, extinguished the lamp, and went, as Felton had


shut.”
“But I shall make you lose your balance, and we shall both be dashed to

“They will discover us!”

rocks, and when arrived on the edge of the sea, whistled.
The four men bent to their oars, but the sea was too high to let them

“Alas!” said Felton, looking at those beautiful hands, and shaking his


“For La Rochelle.”
In fact, they touched the sloop.

“Hurrah for you, then, my beautiful lady,” cried the captain; “and may
the rest.
59 WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH AUGUST 23, 1628
Milady’s apartment before nine o’clock, and it would require three hours
forest of poplars despoiled by the winter, bent with each breath of the
of an ant.
the letter of which he was the bearer, he said, “A pressing message from
anybody, and pretended that it was to the duke alone he would make





serious than you perhaps believe.”
“Because you will look into yourself, and you will do justice to the
threatens me!”
them.

“By force? You are joking! Holloa, Patrick!”
At that moment Patrick entered the room, crying, “A letter from France,
deputies from La Rochelle were waiting, crossed it as quickly as
wound.
chamber. Cries of despair resounded on all sides. The news, which filled
filed, had remembered the verbal caution d’Artagnan had transmitted to

blood, and suppressing his agony to speak of her he loved, “what has she

“ANNE”
her as the death of a stranger!”
“Here, Laporte,” said Buckingham, “these are the only tokens I ever

At this cry all the crowd re-entered the apartment, and throughout the

commanded by the terrace where he was. With the eagle glance of a sailor

sea; “but I swear to you by the memory of my brother whom I have loved
death of the duke, was that such terrible news might discourage the
had already left the port, the one bearing, as we know, Milady, who,
M de Treville, being informed of this by his Eminence, packed his
written immediately to Marie Michon, the seamstress at Tours who had

Aramis, after having blushed two or three times up to the whites of his
Musketeers, and that they formed part of the escort.
four cursed it heartily. D’Artagnan, in particular, had a perpetual

yet drunk all my share of the diamond, and Porthos and Aramis have not
of Athos, wore an impression of deep anxiety; and they continued their
let his glass fall.
“He, that man!”

The hostler, enchanted with the good day’s work he had done, returned to
“Come on, come on!” said d’Artagnan; “let us keep that paper carefully,
impious fortunes.
conceived in the following terms:
of the Carmelites at Bethune, where I will await your orders.”
passions which consumed her gave to her life the appearance of those
delight in stories of the court, which so seldom travel to the
replying a word. Milady, however, saw that this sort of narrative amused
circumstantial afterward, about the cardinal, relating the amours of the
than cardinalist. Milady therefore continued, coloring her narrations
acting thus; and though she has the look of an angel, we must not always
young person is innocent?”


“Alas, yes,” said Milady.

had for a moment allowed them to lose.
capable of supporting fatigue, her mind required repose.
the project of his Eminence; if he was the friend of d’Artagnan, he was
beauty. Milady, however, smiled in observing that she excelled the young
“No, madame,” replied the novice, “only I thought I had chosen my time
“How, you are going soon?” asked Milady.
victim of a treachery?”
of France with which I am unacquainted, and where I have never been



“Name a few of those whom you know, and you will see if they are my

any of them. I know them from having heard one of their friends,

“Speak, madame!” resumed Mme. Bonacieux, with an energy of which she
“Can you not understand that Monsieur d’Artagnan, being my friend, might
what she had just said, saw nothing in this woman whom an instant before

“This evening?” asked Milady, roused from her reverie by these words.
“Oh, I cannot believe you!”
ever. Tell him that certain parties are grateful for the warning he has






that will delight his Eminence! Have you informed him of it?”

the other! Monsieur Cardinal is indeed a privileged man!”


foiled my mission as they foiled the affair of the studs; tell him that


forget that I am her best friend.”

“What’s that?”
presents himself in your name.”


“That is well understood.”
“At Armentieres.”
“Let us see: Buckingham dead or grievously wounded; your conversation
that I am permitted to walk in those woods. Who knows? Perhaps I shall
“I have five hundred pistoles, or thereabouts.”




to anyone in the world, I shall be lost, and perhaps yourself likewise.”
here as the emissary of the cardinal, and in an hour or two a carriage
when they come to fetch you.”
if this continues,” said Mme. Bonacieux, raising her hands to her
“Adieu, brother!” cried Milady.

men who come to ask for you.”
“Well! The carriage is at the door; you bid me adieu; you mount the step
friends, he will bring them to us.”

“Will she permit it?”
“How can I avoid interesting myself for one who is so beautiful and so
And the two women parted, exchanging charming smiles.





Mme. Bonacieux came in; and to remove all suspicion, if she had any,
“You see,” said she, when the lackey had gone out, “everything is ready.
glass with her lips.
“Oh, my God!” said Mme. Bonacieux, “what is that noise?”

to make a step, glued as she was to the spot by terror.
“For the last time, will you come?” cried Milady.

murmur of voices which continued to draw near, amid which she seemed to
D’Artagnan threw down a yet-smoking pistol which he held in his hand,
“SHE! What she?” asked d’Artagnan.

crime!”
“But who poured the wine for you that was in this glass?”
D’Artagnan seized the hands of Athos with an anguish difficult to be

instant on the lips of d’Artagnan. That sigh was the soul, so chaste and
“I was not deceived,” said he; “here is Monsieur d’Artagnan; and you are
who probably owes his life to you twice, I must name myself. I am Lord
diligence, you have arrived too late.”
Athos rose, walked toward his friend with a slow and solemn step,

to the town of Bethune, whose outskirts they perceived, and stopped
Porthos and Aramis regarded each other, not understanding this assurance


Planchet, Grimaud, Bazin, and Mousqueton presented themselves, and
perfectly.
accompany him, but the man refused.

Three times Athos knocked without receiving an answer. At the third
All the rest of the furniture indicated that the dweller in this house
unknown, who remained standing before the Musketeer, drew back with

profane, or being seen by them.
courier, or from one of the horses, dotted the road. At the end of
But he had gone farther than Athos--for at the village of Festubert,
chatted ten minutes with the people of the tavern before he learned that
“To wait!” replied Athos.
vainly in their minds to know who this other person could be.

concealing the stars; the moon would not rise till midnight.
Several times Lord de Winter, Porthos, or Aramis tried to talk with the


“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “she is alone within half a league of us, in
Grimaud shook his head negatively.
At this moment a man who had been crouching in a ditch jumped up and

At this moment a horse neighed. Milady raised her head, saw close to the
not assassinated. Wait an instant, my friend, and you shall be
“We want,” said Athos, “Charlotte Backson, who first was called Comtesse
He turned towards Porthos and Aramis.
d’Artagnan passed to the other side of the room with Porthos and Aramis.
hand; she made him kill the duke. And at this moment, perhaps, Felton is

which pronounced that infamous sentence against me. I defy you to find
drama then unfolded.
see she knows me!”
All eyes were fixed upon this man, whose words were listened to with
arrested.
making his escape; I was accused of complicity, and was condemned to



solitary, with its broken window, its open door, and its smoky lamp
coppery clouds which created a sort of twilight amid the night. On the


saved I shall be avenged.”
three savage cries, which produced a strange and melancholy effect in
and yet she is dead,” said d’Artagnan.
of his hands; and yet, notwithstanding, he could still hear her cry and


pardon you, and I weep for you. Die in peace!”


fell with a sudden force; they heard the hissing of the scimitar and the

Buckingham’s assassination.

As soon as the escort arrived in a city, when they had conducted the
D’Artagnan raised his head and uttered a cry of joy. It was the man he
“How! what do you say?” cried d’Artagnan.


the king, he resolved to follow the advice of Athos and go with them.
the cardinal found, standing before the house he occupied, d’Artagnan,
was guarded.


both to poison and assassinate me!”

of the Carmelites at Bethune, the trial in the isolated house, and the
“Monseigneur, I swear to you that I never for an instant had the

every syllable:


“Here, monsieur,” said the cardinal to the young man. “I have taken from
rebellious nature. “Do with this commission what you will; only

“Here I am, my friends,” replied d’Artagnan; “not only free, but in
Athos smiled with one of his sweet and expressive smiles.

defunct holding out its arms to me, I shall marry the widow. Look here!
After the siege I shall enter the house of the Lazarists. Keep the
“I shall then have no more friends,” said the young man. “Alas! nothing
La Rochelle, deprived of the assistance of the English fleet and of the
gilded carriage.
Grimaud followed Athos.
Planchet obtained from Rochefort the rank of sergeant in the Piedmont

contains. In the midst of the disturbance caused by so rude a call the
certain of the approach of his last hour, was affected with a sincere
had spent three consecutive days answering all the questions that Robert
every mind was full of these prophetic words: women prayed fervently to
stands beneath a brocaded canopy an ebony bed, supported on four twisted
begged the queen to come near, and told her in a low voice that he would
been stifled by a hand of iron. Has God permitted the Evil Spirit to
when we can ill afford to lose it.”

“Be not unjust towards yourself, my lord, and bear in mind that if you
queen, with the glow of sacred inspiration. “Even if there were good
a strange fatality has pursued and overturned my projects. I had hoped
barrier of indifference, even of antipathy. To the tenderest effusion
in the hope that you might there end your days. Far be it from me to

poverty, humility, and penitence, might the more easily grant him

showed that her heart was already agitated by passions beyond her years.
second group was composed of Andre, Joan’s husband, and Friar Robert,
Empress of Constantinople, a style inherited by her as the granddaughter
power unknown, some beneficent fairy had watched over his birth, and
the beauty of the princess that he seemed to see nothing else in the
of Provence, Forcalquier, and Piedmont, and in all his other
the aforesaid lady Marie shall contract a marriage with the very
The vice-chancellor continued:

deathbed, that you may see how the glory of the world passes away. Those
you all alike, as a father should, without exception or preference. I
his cheeks extraordinarily bright, while the princes, barons, and
passion hitherto suppressed in the presence of the king now found its
the hand, slid back the curtains of the balcony, from which was seen the
and shutting herself up in her chamber, gave free vent to her grief. So

that he ought to profit by the depression of spirit the king’s death had
her secrets, the confidante of her most private thoughts. One had but to
“And you find me, fair queen,” replied the confidante, fixing an

unhappy. At times strange thoughts come into my mind: I fancy he no
of kindness; but if Robert of Cabane has deserved the reproach of
“Will you forbid me, madam,” replied Dona Cancha in a kind, affectionate

mistress were wont to rest with a kind of melancholy gentleness on

her joy was great, for she felt that her dreams now began to be
was granted the title of knight.
future as foster mother of the heiress to the throne of Naples, had
from infancy had been Joan’s destined husband, which thus shattered all
abandoned women, and especially attached to her the beautiful and
Bertrand of Artois fallen madly in love with Joan. Suddenly the bandage
He broke out into bitter reproach and violent recrimination, and,
refuse us nothing.”
pointing to Robert—
with care: you have wept long enough; we have long respected your grief.
granting this.”
your infancy, of all the maternal love I have lavished on you, to
like his.”

The Catanese and her son departed instantly, not even waiting to reply,
ecstasy; but this time the young count was able to pass quietly and
double prudence after each victory, and with double courage after each
During the whole time that the queen had remained invisible, Charles had
yet so much reserve, into his speech that he destroyed the disagreeable
intentions, may God unmask all traitors and show me my true friends! I
“You forget, Charles,” said the queen, putting out her hand as though to
privileges and openly supporting men of obscure birth; and I,
could not give credence to the horrible thought that crossed her mind,
The Duke of Duras faintly smiled, and his countenance assumed a sinister
“Yes?”
“In any case, madam, since I have put myself in your hands, you must
say at this solemn moment: to-day I am the guilty man; some day perhaps
CHAPTER III
other mother taking her revenge by praying God to bless him.

the confiscation of my goods, the ruin of my family, poverty and shame


“But the young maiden,” replied Nicholas timidly, “whom your Excellency
was crushed, and had hardly the strength to reply—
to be his shadow; day by day and hour by hour come to me and report the

appeasing the populace, who in their first excitement might have been
always ambling by his side. He gave way to his whims, urged him to
inscribed upon all public acts without adding Andre’s; but Joan, led by

the kingdom), attempted by severe admonitions to stop him while yet on
with brilliant liquid eyes: she had come to tell how her past day had

should discover the place where the princess was concealed. Proceedings
Calabria, was ready to answer with his life. Bertrand yielded to the
the eyes of an immense crowd, assembled suddenly, as by a miracle, upon
his dearly beloved son Charles, Duke of Durazzo and Albania, to take in
town, and re-entered their palace to the sound of trumpets and cheering.
so quickly after; my sister and I, the sole offspring of Charles I, both
my sight; let me come to you, beloved, and weep upon your bosom, beneath
libertinage which would have been intolerable in a conquered city: they
prophets of old, turning their back on some accursed city, would shake
the hands of the apostolic legate in the presence of her husband, who
Those who know a mother’s heart will easily guess that Elizabeth of
Elizabeth could not help admiring the noble seriousness and earnest
departure, and tried to hinder it by every means in his power, was Friar
opposition to Andre’s departure, but would follow himself, renouncing
lighted up by his glance of intelligence—“yes, madam, you will believe
the threshold on hearing the last words, he added—
for departure.”
queen’s counsellors, the governors of the kingdom, will lower their

“My son, as you refuse to come with me, here is a wonderful talisman,
Elizabeth sobbed as she embraced her son, and when she left him she felt
would never see her son again.
obedience in this celebrated convent of Santa Croce, the work of her own

have I neglected?”

power to me, if he leaves me with your love?”
falling.
remained profoundly silent.
answer, he ran him through with his sword. Then the rest fell upon the

from sword and poison?”
sleepy interval; the Molo was covered with a crowd of eager people
features could contrive to put on in such circumstances as these, he
colours. If so, my fair queen, I claim to receive my orders from your
“I am listening.”
in sign of honour. After riding in triumph through the main

that every cloud of former resentment, even the lightest, had
they were about to hold a decisive meeting, and therefore, wrapped in a
“What is it?”

Countess of Morcone.”
with love and vigilance, you must hurry forward, for to-morrow maybe it
“Excuse me, my lord,” said Charles, bowing down to the ground; “it will
brilliant future seemed to offer. Never had the court of Naples shown so

eye. Then Andre was full of his plans for the future, and Isolda stroked
her life in this world and in the world to come; yet she was not his
look, and attributing it to contempt, filled a goblet to the brim and
voice that if they were so late now some would not rise early on the
of his laziness, and jumped out of bed bareheaded, in nothing but his
the doors were shut, and no one held out a helping hand; for the queen

Isolda, when at last she contrived to get a light, rapidly ran to the
fell. Then two monks went upstairs to the queen’s room, and respectfully
thronged, threatening voices were raised, a torrent of invaders
this crime was accomplished. The duke left the corpse two whole days
murderers’ hearts, and the people dispersed about the town, shrieking,
on his knees. The count rushed out of the room with gestures of
conduct of her subjects, dared scarcely lift her head, and stooped to
ill advised as to refuse either of them, he should hand over to justice
it lived only a few months—in the eyes of a man who with such admirable
he asked, on condition, however, that Charles should allow the necessary
condition really belonged to the sick woman, so that he, deceived by the
He sent instantly for the doctor, and asked imperiously what was the
“Very good,” said Charles, dismissing the doctor with no sign of
Charles, pale beneath his bronzed complexion, his forehead moist with a
confessor! My children—I want my children!”


have gladly saved her at the cost of his life, but it was too late. He
had shot beyond her mark, and Charles, started thus on the terrible path
Robert’s actions.
preamble, the union was consummated.
A roar as of a wounded tiger escaped from Robert’s breast: all but blind
interceded tearfully for her sister, and pressing Robert’s hand with
them later on, as his wisdom might dictate.
“My lord, the time has come to give my life for you: I will do my duty;
secluded house, and squeezing his throat with great force, made him thus
the future of my children as guarantee for my word.”

hour later, Philippa, her two daughters, and Dona Cancha joined them in
finding themselves in the same dungeon, they reproached one another,
child by your Excellency; and you know how we managed to make up the
knights and pages, mounted on a magnificent horse, all in black, as a
they also were implicated in Andre’s murder, he condemned them to the
“You forget, my lord, I am under the protection of the law.”
like the growling of thunder: the queen’s heart was petrified with
afterwards wife of the grand seneschal and governess to the queen,

palpitating remains of her two daughters cast upon the fire—they by
The spectacle of this frightful punishment did not satisfy the revenge
But Louis had need of money both to pay his mercenaries and to hold his
sight of this woman, who had been the very soul of the conspiracy, and
go-betweens.”
little by little received all her men within the walls. This was what
treasure, and pointing with his finger, cried—
castle of Saint Agatha.”
angered by her refusal, had written to Louis of Hungary, inviting him to
a lawful grievance; but the accusation ought to be properly formulated
another husband, moreover your own excuses, are all sufficient proofs
had repaired on the invitation of the queen and her aunt. To her cousin
now entered the kingdom from the side of Aquila: on his way he had
to her, made them swear homage and fidelity to Louis of Tarentum, whom
Louis of Tarentum and took refuge in the capital. Resistance was
complete submission. Leaving their young brothers at Naples, they
Hungary embraced them warmly one after the other, asked them several
affection shown to the children, the same invitation to supper. The
pursuing his infernal schemes, and putting away his sad looks, he smiled
his leave, his face suddenly changed, and he cried in an awful voice—
an army against our faithful subjects? You hoped, traitor, to make use
single word. At last, casting his eyes about him and seeing his poor
with me, I say no more waiting for your fury to pass over. Once again,
shapes of a monstrous dream. Night was in his soul, but every now and
glided farther away, and it was all to begin over again. The phantoms
been hanged. He was there asked if he desired to confess, and when he
over the balcony into the garden where Andre’s body had lain for three
burnt, her punishment having been deferred by reason of her pregnancy.
king’s rage, seemed to inflame it the more. Every day there were new
example of caution, and hiding their discontent under a show of respect,
men who escorted her. Many anxious thoughts alarmed her, and she even
always apt at creating disasters, instantly suggested that she would
is at my disposal: let us try to make our way to the queen, and at once
was received with paternal kindness at the court of Avignon; which was
Normandy had come to Avignon to request this exchange in person. We were
you, only in the fear that we might lose you; and remember that on the
her praise. The streets were bordered with a living hedge of people; the
Bohemians, jesters, poets, monks, courtesans, swarmed and clustered
Jews at all times. An abbess, chosen once a year, had the supreme
burning his victims, the unhappy Marie had contrived to make her escape
earth, absolute and supreme judge, emblem of temporal and spiritual
compact mass of humanity surge towards the centre, the cardinals above
Aragon, that he was Prince of Majorca, and would have been ready to shed
of general assent drowned her closing words, several hands flew to their
80,000 florins.
of Hungary, suddenly threatened by the wrath of Heaven and the people’s
justly feel when they meet after they have united in the performance of
Marseilles with her husband, her sister, and two faithful advisers,
everything changed, and fortune turned her back upon him for the second
had only 500 soldiers under Giacomo Pignatelli. In spite of the immense
settle their quarrel in single combat. We append the authentic letters
The King of Hungary first consulted with his council, and then replied:—
But if you wish to fight with us, let it be in the presence of the
The town was on the point of yielding, and had sent messengers to the
of this barbarous age. The widow of Charles of Durazzo was shut up in
“One moment, madam,” said Renaud, stopping her: “you are indeed saved,

moment I fancy I hear cries of vengeance, and you would not leave me now
what you have said.”
have done your duty at once.”
your favour and protection. One word from you, Robert, and I shall bless
women in the street were uttering cries of distress—
beside her, and the priest pronounced the formula that united them for
unpunished. The wind rose with fury, and drove him towards Gaeta, where

entered. The sudden violent reaction broke the pride of the King of
the barons of the kingdom in their train.
series of disillusions. After sustaining wars in Sicily and Apulia, and
court to another seeking aid; it is even said that he was reduced to the
the queen to her sister, and the widow of Charles of Durazzo gained
died miserably in the castle of Ovo. The child would have shared his
that Joan was now dethroned, and released her subjects from their oath
pollute the air she breathed. Otho with his troops was kept at Aversa;
with blood and sweat, his sword broken in his hand, he was forced to
mulberry, the evergreen laurel, all the strong budding vegetation,
first of her happy, peaceful childhood, her grandfather’s blind
was persecution, flight, exile, remorse, punishments from God and curses
pain went up from her heart when she recognised the place where both

name.
him, and said: “Sire, will your majesty do me the honor to accept

had not cured. Of course, his favorites and those of the king
their most magnificent dresses, stiff in their splendid doublets,
And as for the duke, if he could not come, his gentlemen might.
“And I,” murmured St. Luc; “I have more fear of the king present
and less so that day than usual, frowned; but St. Luc approached,

“Decidedly,” thought De Brissac, “I was wrong to think the king
“Now, it is far worse; he smiles with closed lips. I would rather
him out of his comfit box sweetmeats and candied fruits, which
make more; at least they shall be numerous, if they are not good.

“Then it is because the duke is greater than the king.”
“He is neither my friend nor relation, but he is my guest,” said
“Do you not hear, M. de Bussy, you are called?” and, amidst shouts
“Sire, I was preoccupied.”
impertinent smiles which they had bestowed on him a little before.
“Parbleu, he attacks you as well as us.”
will make friends with M. Bussy.” And he advanced towards him.




and I warn you, if your recital be not interesting I shall be

“Ah! look round you.”



“Ah! To-night, I have a rendezvous in a mysterious house of the
place. Which way do you counsel me to take?”
and going up, stopped him.
“The animal will not be difficult to follow; thus then, at the
They heard the king’s voice calling St. Luc.
“And I was afraid you were gone. Dear Jeanne, tell your father
“Here I am, sire,” cried St. Luc, rushing forward. Near Chicot
he, placing his fingers on his month, motioned her to be silent.


stood there. The sentinel from the Bastile; who could not see
with ice.”
“Might he not have suspected something, and changed it?”
they have seen us?”
had yielded and was about to open, when the noise of their assailants
“Yes, monseigneur, if there are not enemies within; but how do
“The Duc d’Anjou!” repeated the others.
wished to see what took him out on his wedding night.”

ourselves in a doorway. And now you know what to believe and
really going to the Jew.


“In any case, it is he; and so to arms!”
courage, which could only be sustained by the rashest adventures.
the clasp.
which the blade was heavier than the handle and which had remained
himself, and prevent his being attacked behind, making all the
which rained around him. All at once he felt a cloud pass over his
his ears and the cloud over his eyes warned him that his strength

two windows a portrait of a lady was hung. He, fixed to his bed,
ceased to occupy his attention; she was all to him, and he looked
young man, who had just, as he was told, taken off his bandage,
This was all Bussy heard, he seemed to feel a red-hot iron in


“Now, my friends,” said he, “will you take me to my hôtel?”
“Well Brother Gorenflot, I trust my hour has not yet arrived

Is nothing true but my combat? Where did I fight? Ah, yes, I
and yet I found myself in the street, and a monk kneeling by
“Capital! you are a doctor; however, I have seen another to-night.
them all.”
before this one is healed.”
their sweetest smiles. He had succeeded La Mole in the affections

to her.”
“Ah! there was a meeting last night between you and M. de St.
me. Indeed, he did all he could to save me. Did he not tell you
The poor woman looked at him with astonishment.
“And why not?”
“By seeing.”
“You laugh at me, and it is very cruel in my distress.”

Germain-l’Auxerrois they met a large party in which Bussy recognized
“They shall pay for it, Bussy; they shall pay dearly.”
“Monseigneur, I know you so well.”
with it. I know your assassins,” added he, in a low tone.
his sentence.

When they entered, “Remember your promise,” said Bussy, “I have
“I must, to provide for your entrance.”
he now expected to find occupied by St. Luc, whom the king in his

“Ah! it was quite natural; I could not bear to see a brave gentleman

and of virtue like Socrates, who practised it. It is in vain

“To the Louvre, that would be droll.”
“Bah! try him.”



“I knew their voices.”


“Sire!” said he, “receive my humble respects.”

with the left.”
“Sire, it was Quelus.”
arms round his neck, saying, “The king wishes it.”



doctor.”
“Oh!” cried St Luc, “you see me ill, and you want to keep me from
“Perfectly.”

I return.”
behind the curtains of the bed. When St. Luc entered he found
or eight young spaniels, who were licking his bands. Two servants

“What the devil are you doing, M. Chicot?” cried Henri.
all the supper.”
“Thanks, sire,” said St. Luc, putting them back in their basket,
him his soup in a golden cup. Then Henri said a prayer, a short
the somber corridors of the Louvre.
All the lights in his room were out, and no sound was to be heard
Henri, looking terrified and grotesque in his night-dress. His
“It--it is nothing,” said the king, without moving his eyes,



The queen said no more, for she knew, better than any one, how
the procession and returned to the Louvre.

“Poor St. Luc!” cried the king, clasping his hands.

“No, thank you, sire.”
“St. Luc,” said the king, solemnly, “do you ever dream?”

“I should think so.”

his orders, in the great gallery. Then he gave D’O, D’Epernon
all, my cream.”

cow-hide, and now we are to begin again. Do not let us do it,
“Henri, you look sinister; if you do not let me go, I will cry,
friend Chicot.”
“And even a wise one.”



“Was it like the sound of a trumpet?”
“I? all that astonishes me is, that he waited so long to reproach


“Very well.”

“Why do you not believe, Chicot? It is said that God speaks to

“But you will not?”
“Well, well, go to bed.”

“What is it?” asked he in a low voice.
heaven; nevertheless, it is dreadful.”
“What for?”
Henri obeyed; he began to understand.
sinner.”
“Hush! let me speak.”

“It is true.”

“How! a voice from the side?”
“Yes, and so will you in a minute. Be reasonable, and do as I
had scarcely entered it, when he heard the voice redoubling its


it up; it was Chicot, who, hearing the noise, judged that his
I forbid you to return to it.”

repeat his movements of the night before, retreated to the wall,
to advance, and soon he could see a black figure, which, as it

However, the mathematician now advanced to the next door, and
“Mon Dieu! how strange.”
“Then you do not know it?”


Beauheillis, 502 steps from here. I am a poor surgeon, not unskilful,

even if exaggerated, could do no harm.”
“None.”
I am sure; it was sweet and gentle.”
“A bed of white and gold damask?”

“As well as I could.”
“From a room at the side.”
“My dear M. Rémy, I will make your fortune. Well?”
“And you kept it?”
“To return the purse?”
“Well, that is just right; I will give you a patient. Will you
“But, no, I tell you, I keep you for myself and my friends. Now,
“Yes, I. Did you help to take me there?”

dream was a reality, and had, in fact, given him that generous
“Well!” said he, “how are you, M. le Comte?”
send me back to the Rue Beauheillis, five hundred paces from
“But you must ride.”
there. She certainly is not a simple bourgeoise--those tapestries,
“Good; that gives me the hope that you will keep me.”
the king would not attend, and much astonishment was expressed
éstortuaire [Footnote: The éstortuaire was a stick, which the

“Your highness will say I am very envious; but I search, and
“What?”


kneeling, according to custom. As soon as the king was armed,

“They say so, but that is all; he is not of very good birth. But
“Good, that is what you think; now tell us what you know.”
him, but my gun missed fire.”


“Who? St. Luc?”

“I mean, monseigneur, that he carries away women for you on his
went, and found the duke laughing.
did it happen?”
house.”
“No, for loving you.”
“I fear so.”

“Monseigneur, this is a sort of thing that every man must do for
alone. I defied them all; they laid wait for me, attacked me


they might report to me----”
“No, I feel for you.”
“But if, in entering, he close the door behind him?”


“Monseigneur,” then said M. de Monsoreau to the duke,

“I see it; and look! at the sound of the trumpets announcing the
“Well, I believe I have been more lucky.”

Bussy dined like a man who does not know when he will sup, then,
staircase, and went up. In the corridor he stopped, for he heard
windows, hung with tapestry, which sent a thrill of joy through


“Ah!” thought Bussy, “the white horse, the woman carried away,
“You have forgotten the Duc d’Anjou, madame.”

“If you break this door you will find me dead on the threshold.”

“Bussy! you are the brave Bussy!” cried Diana, filling with joy

you came here.”

“On his return from Spain my father married. His two first children,
“The castle of Méridor was surrounded by vast forests, belonging
One morning the woods resounded with the sound of the horn, and
nearer, and, darting forward, I saw my poor Daphne again; she

in their pursuit. Soon some of them reached her, and, stopped
on the bank. When I came to myself again, I was in bed, in a
twenty times, that had he known I had any interest in his victim,

daughter, never----’
my father at court. My first impulse was to beg my father to
informed of my return. Indeed, no sooner had I entered my room,
must not know where you are going.’ ‘But then, who will take me
“My father embraced me once more, and we set off. I was ignorant
‘Oh! my father! my father!’ I cried. ‘Listen, mademoiselle,’
looks. She smiled, and went on.
room for your servant is adjoining. When you wish for anything,
said she, pointing to the window. ‘Yes, if they are not barred.’
seemed asleep in the castle, and no noise but the cry of the
second night passed as quietly as the first; then came the hour
entered. It was the man who had spoken to us before. I recognized
Then looking at Diana, he said--
heart, will come at ten o’clock to-night to apologize for his
“No, M. de Monsoreau.”

watches over the honor of Diana de Méridor?’ ‘You told me, monsieur,

follow me?’ I looked at Gertrude. ‘Reflect that each minute that

looked out, saw the floating veil, and uttered a cry. ‘You see I

pursued we must leave two tracks, and they must be able to say
utter a cry. M. de Monsoreau put his hand on my mouth, and said,
us reach quickly our stopping-place, for I wish to know if you
but instead of entering the village we went by across-road to
“MY BELOVED DIANA--As I do not doubt that, yielding to my prayer,
“BARON DE MÉRIDOR.”
‘Well, monsieur, I am ready to accept your protection on the
‘I listen, monsieur.’ ‘Only to travel by night.’ ‘Agreed.’ ‘To let
Gertrude entered. The joy of this good girl was great; she had
we crossed the river, and in ten minutes we were in the Place de
open; we entered the middle one, and found ourselves in the room
we were at the end of the Rue St. Antoine, near the Bastile. That
to Paris yesterday. One does not like to stay in a place where
that?’ ‘Just opposite you.’ There was a silence. Then I said, ‘When
anticipation and live in the hopes of that happy moment.’ Then
voice, frightened me more than a will firmly expressed, and which
earnestly at me. A man stood by him.”
more than an enemy.”
was there and saw you.’ ‘It is true, monsieur; but I do not know
he will follow you wherever you go till he finds you.’ ‘Oh! mon
This meeting inspired me with profound terror; I feared that
it would take six days for a messenger to reach your father,
her again, and this time she answered him. On the following day

‘What have you to reproach me with?’ said he. ‘Nothing, on the
his conduct conceals some mystery, I believe.”

the ambushed men rushed forward, crying, ‘a mort! a mort!’ I

wondering who had entered. Soon we heard steps, and a man appeared,
doctor with his eyes bandaged.”
produce sleep, and said that the only thing then was to keep you

“During that day, Gertrude went out, and met Aurilly. He was
went out. I followed him with my eyes, but instead of going away
tell you,’ said I. ‘You know that I am not alone.’ ‘Gertrude saw

or rather angel, who had appeared to me. Oh! I am unfortunate.
sent me to find out.”
“Oh, yes! for, in truth, I know not what has become of him.”
with a respect mingled with love and sadness, Bussy took leave.
in their fur cloaks, then a number of pages, after them lackey,

Mayenne, author of my martyrdom, nor on Nicholas David, his

“You were, then, well beaten, my poor Chicot?”
Henri did not like to hear his cousin of Guise spoken of, and
for a bottle of wine, and placed himself so that, although he
the other was short, as pale as he was red, and as obsequious
sanctity that wolves change into lambs only by entering it? This

two things--a monk’s robe, for I see no layman here, and then this

“Thanks for the wish, but you know I cannot bear to eat alone.”

However, what he wanted in height, he made up in breadth, measuring
voice.
“But when did you breakfast?”
grow impatient.”

with a sauce made with crabs, and we drank that nice Burgundy
“True, and yet you drink that abominable red water. Fie!” And

“What are you doing, brother?” said Gorenflot, following his
“Fins!”
M. Boutromet uncorked a bottle and gave a glass to Chicot. Chicot

“Give me a few drops more, and I will tell you.”

and yet not sin, be so kind, brother, as to throw a few drops

two more bottles of wine.”




“Ah! yes, he is a very virtuous man, our King Henri III.”
“It is here,” cried Gorenflot, striking his forehead.
key to a simple monk.”
“He is not yet drunk enough;” so thought Chicot; and he filled

trying to do so, but at the first step he rolled on the floor.
“I begin, ‘My brothers, it is a good day for the faith, a very
“M. Boutromet,” said he, “here is for our supper, and for my

staircases, while an iron door between them led from the nave to
was being closed. The three monks were seated in armchairs, like
progress of the Union there had been confided to the Baron de
glory in saying that I was one of the faithful of our great Henri
spoke.
“In Paris! impossible!” cried many voices.
St. Bartholomew come, which seems to the faithful to be more
Henri will find that he has nothing left, and will be politely
Therefore, without hesitation, he mounted the chair and began.
me ham, eggs, or money for the convent.”
to hear Brother Gorenflot preach; but it appears to me that their

What had made him quit the king was the sight of M. de Mayenne and
VERY DANGEROUS TO SEE AND HEAR.
in front of the choir.
they are gone, I will pile chairs upon benches, Pelion on Ossa,
Then Chicot pushed the inside bolt, made himself as comfortable
from Opsat, dead in 533, down to Pierre Boudin, predecessor of
recognized their hero.
themselves in the nave. A single one, conducted by M. de Monsoreau,


who often seems insensible and deaf to the things of this world,
The applause and bravos resounded through the chapel. Then the

it ought to govern all for the good of its subjects, or only
which you profess, but to the person of your highness; and if
wisdom, monseigneur, the natural chief of the Holy Union, and we
right to do by our birth and position.”
“I with Maugiron,” said Livarot.
really complain of is the royalty which we are under, and which

“Monseigneur,” replied the Duc de Guise, “your highness has heard,
To-day we choose a chief capable of honoring and enriching the
“Long live François III.!” cried all the gentlemen, drawing their
“Monseigneur,” then said the cardinal, “to the scruple which
Immediately, the lad, who was evidently waiting, came out, and

etiquette would have assigned to them. Meanwhile, the cardinal
blessing of God, that you may resist your enemies, and protect
the cardinal took the crown, and, holding it over the head of

came back again, only this time without their frocks. On seeing
“Ah, brother cardinal,” cried she, “how well you acted the holy
closed?”



“To gain a legitimate right is everything,” continued Nicolas

“A little patience, monseigneur. Bonne----”
“Oh! oh!” said the duke and the cardinal.
of England.”



which was planted at the bottom of the wall, jumped from tomb to
Brother Gorenflot lay snoring just in the place where Chicot had
of which had fallen with fatigue, as they stopped. They entered
flowers, enjoying the sunshine and amused at everything.
“Doubtless, a man.”
Méridor, its great oaks, and its endless thickets, its rivers,
me; it is of a color much in vogue at the court, and he looks

bracelet.
“Then you are traveling?” asked Jeanne.

“Shall I marry you?”


“To the château of Méridor.”
Baron de Méridor, one of the richest noblemen in France, and



he knew about Diana. But there was much that he could tell to
young woman.

“Diana!” said he. At this name the two dogs uttered a mournful

“He is our friend, M. Louis de Clermont, Comte de Bussy d’Amboise,
that monster, that demon, and you dare to avow it, and have the
noble and generous gentleman living. See, my good father, he weeps
floating on the surface.” And the old man finished with a burst
“Speak, monsieur,” said the baron, trembling.
Monsoreau, loved my poor daughter, and interested himself for


words; “but meanwhile, friend or enemy, you are my guest, and
to the young people an inexplicable phenomenon. In the morning


“Then the husband has not returned?”
“But as I feared, if I were constantly watching, to pass for a
has placed in my way. Then you are received in the house?”
fast; but still, petticoats are always a little in the way. ‘Mon
“Oh no, how should the poor doctor know a great lord like M. de

thrown himself at the feet of the king? What could the prince

“Take care; I wept for my child, and you said, ‘Console yourself,

for a daughter like you.”
Monsoreau. Where is she?”
“Ah, yes, my father; why did M. de Monsoreau let you think me
“Then why did he let me think you dead? I, who wept for you so
Diana cast a glance at the young man. He smiled and said, “M.
“And he did save her. Then, monsieur, I need not ask if you mean
that I hate him; my father sees in him only my saviour, and I
at what he was about to say, Diana heard and understood.
arms of the man who has already so well merited your confidence.
to me.”
consideration for him, and promised all he wished. Then, by the
But whatever I invent, it will be hard to escape punishment. It
and stuffed the empty purse into his breeches pocket.

“Ah! it is you at last,” said the abbé.
“Let me explain, father.”


so strongly in your heart, will injure you in Paris. I wish you
“By submitting to this temporary exile, my dear brother, not
embracing him, pushed him to the door. There he found all the

He had no money; so that when out of Paris and he heard eleven

“Alas! M. Chicot! I am proscribed,” said Gorenflot, with an enormous
“Do not joke; you know quite well what I was doing last night.”



“It means, that with me mind is stronger than matter; so that

“Accept! I should think so. But have you money to travel with?”



They went on for about four leagues, then Gorenflot lay down on
“Oh, no, dear M. Chicot; it is so fatiguing to go fast. Besides,
The monk sat still and groaned.
Chicot began to trot, and the ass followed. The first moments
“Oh, M. Chicot!” said he, as soon as he could speak, “do you
his back a man with a hundred and fifty pistoles in his pocket,
“Ah, M. Chicot!” cried he, “what does it all mean? First we must
“I promise you, compère.”
HOW BROTHER GORENFLOT CHANGED HIS ASS FOR A MULE, AND HIS MULE
“Why so?”

at daybreak and galloped till noon, but all in vain; no mules
indeed, that the poor animals were trembling from head to foot.

lackeys had disappeared. Chicot trembled. “Go,” said he, to


“Which they paid you?”
to Chicot, who felt half inclined to give it to him, but reflecting
Chicot watched Nicolas David into the principal hotel of the
“You deserve a recompense,” said Chicot to him, “and you shall
to have been sent on a mission by the king, to whom he professed
“What! is he a disguised Huguenot?”
“Where will you go?”
“And then?”

shall turn out.”

“Oh, it is the worthy man himself!”
“But,” said Gorenflot, who did not like the conversation, “you
to tell Chicot.


“What is he like?”
odd?”
lackey waiting with a horse, which M. de Gondy mounted and rode
“Even if he be drunk?”


Chicot passed him a jug of water, which he emptied.

the King, summon him to give up the papers he has just received

“Good; and when you have got them, knock on the wall.”

“Then he will be deceived, for I have just confessed.”

you so, but it is what we must all come to sooner or later. Confess,
“What papers?” cried the sick man, in a voice as strong as though

“Who are you?”

“Because I was told so.”


slipped a little to the side, crying out, “Help, friend! come to
“Dress yourself, monsieur,” said Chicot; “I do not wish to take
“That of M. de Guise, who descends, as you know, in a direct line
“Oh, very easily; I will relate the truth, for I must tell you,
“Yes, and I found it very ingenious, especially that part about
really have been ill, so I sent you a brave monk, to excite you
“Ah! then, on the faith of a gentleman, I will kill you! But if
breath; therefore, I go to get you hanged. Adieu, M. David,”
laugh. The two adversaries were nearly matched in height, but
mouthful of blood. But by a natural movement he tried to drag
the door, called Gorenflot.
“The wretch wanted to strangle me, a holy man, and he is punished


“M. Bernouillet,” said he, “a great event has taken place in your
“Go up-stairs, lift up the bedclothes, look at his neck, and you
“Amen,” replied the monk.
praying for an heir to the throne of France, were just finishing,

“Well, you must wait until we leave the church.”

“Explain yourself, monsieur; who is this woman?”
perhaps hoped she was so.”
“Finish.”
my love.”
“Yes, he knew my intentions.”
“Monseigneur, what do you say! This man incited you to dishonor





“Nothing more easy; make her father act.”

“No, I go first; where shall I meet your highness?”


“Well, you can penetrate into the Louvre, while I remain in the
“Sometimes; come, take courage, and come in with me.”
king was seated.
as he always did; so he went on: “But what has become of you? Do
I remember, was nearly killed by one. And then spears are sharp
people laughed heartily at the last joke.”
accustomed to be together, and you separated them. Join them
“It seems to me that, among your creditors, you forget the

Does he seem to you less guilty than he did yesterday?”


de Méridor, who has been my wife for more than a month, and whom
wife of M. de Monsoreau, and are to be presented this evening.
regard to M. de Monsoreau. When he first received him, it was

goodness leads you to exaggerate, you no more caused the death
The tone of his voice and his look struck Monsoreau. “Monseigneur,”
“Your highness wished to make me understand that perhaps Mademoiselle


My wife is mine, and no one can take her from me, not even the
you shall set off into the exile I impose on you; you shall have
“Well, well,” stammered he, “this request, speak lower--I listen.”
will he miss the pearl that I steal from his royal crown.’”
and a king should never forget those to whom he owes his crown.


“What do you want?”
“And that you shall honor my wife with a smile when I shall present

“You; who?”
“Then you are not ill?”
“Chicot, M. de Morvilliers came here last evening.”


“You know I did, for you were there when he came.”
“Well, then, go to bed, Henri; you see your police is bad.” And,
“A plot!” cried all.
“Alas, yes, monseigneur,” said M. de Morvilliers.

“Against whom?”

A burst of laughter followed this speech; then M. de Morvilliers
arm, that every province should receive a deputy from the
“There are chiefs----”
“A monk called Gorenflot.”

about to speak?” he asked.

noise for a subject; there they do not make enough for a prince.”
serve the king,’ you know, my cousin.”
and invent new prayers.”


the king.”


“I think that, as usual, you are in the right, my cousin; convoke,

Heaven for your merits.”


“Sire,” said François, completely duped by his brother, “you
“To me, sire.”
to raise troops without raising an outcry, scarcely to walk,
therefore, when I can speak freely from my heart, as I do now,


“Because all combats fatigue me; therefore I must make him chief
“Look round you, brother.”

“Confidence! When you are the chief, what have I to fear? The
“Particularly; but I dare not too much displease M. de Guise.”
“In my room.”
his brother gone, gave an angry growl, and rapidly made his way
IN WHICH IT IS PROVED THAT LISTENING IS THE BEST WAY TO HEAR.
“I think not; but he retained you?”
At this moment Henri, hearing a noise, turned and saw Chicot
“How, monseigneur?”
“You are an adroit politician, monseigneur, if you did this.”
to the throne.”

are born under fatal influences; but my brother Henri is, thank
“Yes, monseigneur; the name of king has long brought misfortune

of France; and even the kingdom of Poland might not have been
“And you?”


in the Rue de l’Arbre Sec that the crowd was the thickest. The
seemed approaching, when Chicot, feeling some one touch his arm,
“Do you think I have anything to fear?”
crying, howling, and pushing. At last the mass opened, and a monk,
“The underneath one is the most eloquent,” said Chicot, “but the
tears.”
speak of. I and Panurge have come from Villeneuve-le-Roi, in

of all good Catholics. You do not know what is passing in the

to run after the man, who was gliding away, followed by only
them at the corner of the Rue Tirechappe, and then hid himself
 thought Chicot. The lady now leaned out of the window, and Chicot
“Ah, dear Agrippa,” replied the man who had spoken first, “it
being recognized there than in the open street.”
their souls, and would kill me if they could, working to smooth

Where can my François III. be? Ventre de biche, I must look for
inn with a dreadful Huguenot. M. de Guise was listening intently,
prefer a bottle of wine to your friend.’
And the monk, vigorous and strong, powerful as a bull, but overcome
“He who loves well chastises well,” said Chicot, redoubling his

an agent of M. de Mayenne’s and killed him.”

give way to grief more easily than a coward. Those from whom a
they fear so much to seem to love--they attach so exaggerated
cold under my knee with ten inches of steel in his heart, and


The prince, piqued at these short answers, began to examine the
rebuffed. “Come, speak frankly, Bussy,” said he.
friendship; you, who love no one?”
Bussy looked at him. “Have you not Aurilly to go with you?”
“The doctor, monseigneur,” said the young man.
“Too cold!” cried the duke, surprised that any one should oppose
“I prefer my friend.”
“The temperature has changed since.”


“Well, so much the better; I need not lose time in showing you

“You had some other object in bringing me here than that I should
she advanced, and Bussy grew suddenly pale, for he recognized
sweet emanations, and the young man felt tempted to think that
brought you there, by force, perhaps.”
words nor ideas.

“Do you doubt my words?” said Diana.

agitation.
“Jealous! What does he want then? mon Dieu! whose happiness can
“Well! M. le Comte, if it be true that you had any desire to see

yourself, of seeing you sometimes, of touching your dress as
“Oh! if you knew!” cried Diana, covering her face with her hands.

whole train of gentlemen, re-entered the Louvre, accompanied

to put me off.”
At this moment, however, the door opened, and D’Epernon appeared,

off, and who, with his five or six apprentices, seemed likely
“Here I am,” cried the voice; and indeed, in the corner of the

“By committing a cowardice, sire.”

“Perhaps he did not recognize you, as you were blue.”

“And, now,” said Quelus, “we say, ‘Save us,’ sire; or rather,
you want.”



“So much the better.”
so brilliant, and the moon so clear, that I thought it would
have all ready for to-morrow morning at ten. Quelus, Schomberg,
“Those who follow will see.”
the table a letter from M. de Guise, which had been brought to
“You are reading?” asked the king.
himself, he said:

“On this, that you are making a request unworthy of a gentleman,
The duke jumped out of bed, with the letter crumpled in his hand,

“Yes, my brother, I acknowledge it.”

“Always, but particularly to-night.”
He is at home, ill in bed, burning with fever.”
have deceived me.”
“It is well; adieu, gentlemen.”
here you must stay.”
The next morning, about nine, Bussy was eating his breakfast,


well and so happy; St. Marie l’Egyptienne has cured you once,
to keep you safe and sound, under pretext that your life belongs
man.

jealous husbands; they are animals, who, in such cases, strike
“You are right, Rémy; I will live.”
“Monsieur,” replied a page, “there is a gentleman below who wishes



“M. d’Anjou! Who told you that?”
“And what has happened to him?”
who was dyed blue yesterday, as you know, since you passed during
meditation, and M. Laurent Testu, the governor, keeps a good

“On my honor, if possible.”
Bussy called Rémy. To do him justice, he was listening at the
“What do you say to Normandy?” said Chicot.

and after having made them all swear to recognize the chief that
Louvre, Aurilly.”
It is not at the time when the king is about to choose a chief
Chicot playing chess. Aurilly tried to pass, but Chicot, with

“But, M. Chicot, how does it happen that you are studying this
“Really!”

next room. Enter, M. Aurilly, and remind the prince that we are
you not enter, you who are privileged?”





had happened to your majesty, and I returned.”
Monsoreau bowed, and said, “Where does your majesty wish me to



and if she had only that worthy baron to amuse her it would be
“Yes,” said the king; “but what did your adverb mean?”
king; so he said as mildly as he could, “What, have you friends
“M. Chicot!”
Duc d’Anjou?”
the king.

HOW THE KING ANNEXED A CHIEF WHO WAS NEITHER THE DUC DE GUISE NOR
be”--he made a slight pause--“Henri de Valois, King of France
the queen mother, who was in the secret, then he passed the pen

la Ligue!”
“That is just what I do not think.”

“By whom was he consecrated?”
The king frowned.
men under his orders, ventre de biche! and a real army, not like
a Valois is on the throne, it would be necessary to look back
“You are mad. Learn to read, my friend.”

“Who is he?”
advocate?”
“As St. Crepin.”

“His highness?”
“That he has gone to Anjou.”

“You are joking, are you not, M. Chicot?”
“Where is the king?” he asked: “I have to render an account to
him. He, on his part, was mortally ennuyé, as well as anxious,
“If he no longer fears it, he will punish it; you know Valois,


Henri did not seem to hear. “Good morning, Quelus,” said he kissing

my brother.”
“What for?--to lie, or to tell me things which I know already?
it was by the aid of Henri of Navarre, and now it is with the
in cunning, and in a combat you would be killed. Dream no longer

is the best man in the world to conquer ill tempers.”
CHAPTER LI.
He had recently had near him a brave and valiant heart and
entered from time to time, and, without seeming even to notice

feet?”
sheets, for instance.”
the duke was not likely to attempt a perilous escape. From time
sleep. Then he began to swear, and break everything near him.
it was wrapped in a piece of paper. Then the duke’s ideas began

on which he sat down. Indeed, five minutes had not passed before
“No, no,” said Maugiron, “on the contrary, my bear is quite
Left alone, the duke, knowing he had at least an hour before
sister herself, could know of a ladder hidden in her dressing-room?
chessboard and were playing. He extinguished his light.
immense cloud for a moment, and the prince fancied that he saw
and he found a steady support for his foot. He descended rapidly,
“Quick!” replied the other.
“Ventre St. Gris! it means that we are saved.”
horses than I have, and is rich enough to kill a dozen if he
ennuyée at my absence.”



seen troops of dogs rushing from the hills in pursuit of some
to tell me.”
much interest in you.”


“I mean my father and I; you did not think anything else, did
that invincible Bussy, he who fears no one--I was alone with him
confessions from the provincial, buried at Méridor. Do you understand

her friend, who, seeing her faint, had returned softly, and stood
not suitable for a man of your rank, but it is very imprudent.”
I took one route and you another. You came by Rambouillet, and I
“Bussy, the handsome Bussy, two days in a provincial town and
over, and saw the marks on the grass where you had been sitting.
scratches.”
Bussy smiled at Diana. “Oh, no,” he said, “that would not have
useless; you know I approve; but here must stop my indulgence;
in your heart.”
may die of grief, but you will live free and happy, and you may
Diana, I swear to you, that if I die for you, it will be in adoring
by a warning cough. Instinctively the clasped hands parted. Jeanne
“Is that all?” said he; “have you nothing to say?”


The next day, Bussy left Angers before the most wakeful bourgeois
thrown myself into the arms of death, would now tremble to die
breathe a word of this. It is the more important, dear Diana,
horse I ever rode. When I return to the city, buried in sweet
and vigor!”
for your horse!”
doing, killing horses on the road at this hour?”
who began to reflect that his secret residence in Anjou might
of the district.”
morning.”

at everyone who approached you.”


“I had business.”


“Good! and what about M. Schomberg?”
did you do to deliver me from my unlucky situation?”
you.”

“Yes, friends that you do not know.”
“Well, never mind him. How the devil did you get out of the Louvre?”

“By whom?”

Bussy returned home, but instead of St. Luc, whom he expected,

“You were very wrong.”

“My dear friend, I thank you, but you know my scruples.”


“My dear St. Luc, you will do me a great service by consenting;

the king on account of the love of the Parisians for him. When

influential here.”

him to be in a hurry to present myself to him.”
outweigh his love fancies. He passed the night banqueting with





“Listen,” said the duke, “I have an idea.”





“Why, the town is not very strong, but well defended----”

“Now,” said he, “let Roland go; at the end of this road you will
cave with the prince.
and from time to time, under pretext of examining the outer
without his knowledge.
men behind him.
and in less than ten minutes fifteen or twenty of them were changed
However, the captain had managed to communicate the fire to the
“Well, then, take care of your hands!”



“Mort de ma vie, monseigneur,” cried he, “they are our friends
“Monseigneur,” said Bussy, “how many militia do you think there

which the prince imposed upon them. People never mind giving or

be back till eight o’clock.”
“Oh no.”
“Yes, and it is his highness’s favorite horse. M. de Bussy gave
country, passing gradually from a trot to a gallop.
a minute Monsoreau saw a wall, and a horse tied to a neighboring
The animal had a saddle-cloth embroidered in silver, and in one
At this noise the lovers must have turned and seen him, for the
In two hours and a half, he arrived at the gates of the city,

The duke looked delighted. “It is well,” said he; “M. de Monsoreau,
“Get tipsy,” said Antragues; “there is nothing so good when you


privilege of knowing better than Livarot himself what had passed,
“But listen.”

“So much the worse.”
“Gently, my son,” said he, laying hold of Maugiron.
“Schomberg, Schomberg, a little reason, I beg.”
was half lying in a great armchair: She heard the news without
“What do you mean, my son?”






“My son, at every disappointment you meet with, at every misfortune


confess, but which would afflict you, or else they will chase
“Chicot, Chicot, you are a bird of bad augury.”
“That is the minimum; let us pass to Guyenne; here it is, this

“You saw Henri of Navarre in Paris?”
“You are right, Chicot, and my mother is right. I will call the
“And when do you ever give orders, except, perhaps, to flagellate



“They have escaped?”

“What can I do, then?”


“Oh, my good mother!” cried Henri, kissing her hands, “you are

“I was not thrown,” replied the count, “for I also am a good

“Yes, are there any orders against it?”

As he spoke he heard steps behind him, and turned.





horse was there. The count climbed the wall again, but no one
“Do you do us the honor of remaining at the chat?” asked the baron.

“I cannot tell, if it was some other woman.”


CHAPTER LXIV.
“I am very glad to have met you here.”
is like the leaf of the tree, which the wind blows about. You

“Perfectly; but why is not the park safe, are there bears here?”
“Does she often walk in the park?”


“Oh! I should like that better.”
“You saw a man in the park?”
copse, St. Luc pointed out the spot where Bussy always came over.


“Oh, I believe you, my dear sir.”
“Well!”
“Wait, then.”


“Then I will kill you in his place.”


at that bed of poppies and dandelions.”
other things, a thrust, which you shall see presently. I tell
I am not sorry for what I have done. You are horribly jealous,
them, “Pardon me,” said he, “but may I say a few words to Jeanne?”
“Not precisely to me, but to a person who was near me.”

horse.”

“Then Diana is a widow.”
“To Paris.”

make peace with the king, Anjou not seeming to me very safe after

than the sound of the trumpets. They saw her, and saluted her
no longer there to hear, he and his friends had ridden off towards
hurt yourself.”
“Ill--my poor child, ill!” cried she; “ah! let us hasten to him;
“Here she is!” cried he.

be paid for by blood.”
mind weakened by suffering. She overwhelmed him with tenderness,



“My son,” said she at length, “you are quite right; they are words
as decided as he appeared to be, when a slight event changed


letter to him.





“Oh, do not say that, madame, you tear my heart!” cried François,
“No; return, and on my honor, on my love as a mother, I solemnly

Bussy.
and what he should say to her. He had just arrived at the park
recovered his presence of mind, and said to himself that if Monsoreau
is now, helpless and three parts dead, it would be an infamy.”
“Fetch me a priest and a doctor.”

“In my back, not in my chest.”
man.
“That I live!”



DE MONSOREAU ON THE DEATH OF HER HUSBAND, AND FOUND HIM THERE
“Yes, from you.”
enemies, do you not? For I do not believe, as some people say,

“She offered me many things.”
“Ma foi! I believe you are right, Bussy; I will think of it.”

“Oh, that dear St. Luc!”
“No, it was you.”

a bunch of keys. Immediately behind him stood a lady.




Bussy did not quit Diana; the smiles of Monsoreau gave him a liberty

Anjou.”
and I will manage all.”

some of the flowers exhale dangerous perfumes.”


As they went home again, the duke felt unwilling to leave Anjou
“I will stay here a week; depend upon it I shall draw new concessions
it your interest.”

“Thanks, monseigneur, but these things cannot be paid for.”


was, little by little, and man by man, enrolling an army for

“Who knows?”


majesty did not expect me.”
Henri did not reply at once; he would not yield immediately.
shall have done my duty. Sire, Anjou is on fire; Touraine is
“You are welcome, St. Luc!”

“Madame!” said Chicot, “a good wife should not leave her husband,”
swelling out like a balloon. The monk resembled a hogshead; and
feast, seated at a table in which a hollow had been cut on purpose
“No, you speak from inspiration; you open your mouth, and the
is to fight for the faith; go then, fulfil your mission, only


“Morbleu! it is M. Chicot,” cried Gorenflot, joyfully.
“Let me see!”
Let us leave the two friends entering the Corne d’Abondance,
on quickly. But he could see nothing of them, and suddenly all
his servants at his hotel. Rémy recognized it in a moment. Diana

“I said, M. le Comte, that if you excite yourself so much, you
the litter to occupy the count. A few seconds after, Bussy was
“Speak on, my beloved Diana; you do not know what music I find
“Diana!” it cried, “where are you? Answer me.”

“Jealous!” said Diana, with an adorable smile.
During these ten days Diana had conquered all Bussy’s pride,
As neither Catherine nor the Duc d’Anjou reappeared at the Louvre,
what your mother has taught you to do to one another.” Therefore
prudence itself. Now, if he is strong, we must temporize with him.
“Then why do you let all your friends bellow so?”
If an ambassador arrive, receive him courteously. And as to your



“With a suite?”

“Let him enter,” continued he. Bussy, with his hat in his hand,


the honor of asking how you are?”

“Really, gentlemen, you all look very gloomy.”
“It seems to me that there is an echo in this room,” said he quietly.

“What, gentlemen,” cried Henri, feigning anger, “you dared to
“I have two words to say to you.”
de Bussy.”

“Are you ill?” said he, “you are so pale; you look as though you
“Well, what do you want?”

“And I have announced his death to everyone; he will find his
“Ah! I understand that this makes you wait more patiently for

“And ask him what day it will please him that I should cut his
Maugiron, and ask him to join the party.”

“You will wait, then?”

such arms as may please you. Do you accept?”
“If we all choose the same day and hour, M. de Bussy will be rather
The four young men looked at each other; then Quelus, red with
“Yes!” cried all.

“Why! what is the hurry?”
man. Not to see her, smile on her, touch her hand. Mon Dieu!----”


her in a friendly manner, and she held out her hand to him, saying,
“Oh! madame, St. Luc does not tell you that I wish to die.”
be more worthy of a gallant man.”
“Thank you!” said St. Luc.

see him, and told him that Rémy promised that his wound would
“You must sleep after the dressing of your wound,” said Rémy.
it. As for Diana, she gave herself up to the two instincts that

“Listen! I know M. de St. Luc, and I can assure you he is devoted

from the window, three hundred yards off, who is coming to visit
“It is true, but----”

skill; horses, dogs, trees, game, and hunters, mingled together
“It is true.”
de Monsoreau wherever she goes.”


him only a hypocritical friendship. He was vaguely uneasy at
two lackeys, who formed the prince’s suite. Both Bussy and the
be quite well.”



“Explain yourself.”
“Ill! poor woman! it must be grief at seeing you suffer.”
“He is my best, I might say my only, friend.”

“I hope your highness will pardon me--it was in your service.”

“Yes, monseigneur.”
“Yes, and besides the kiss, I heard----”
not wish me to be King of France;” and the duke, smiling with
any one walking alone at night through the streets of Paris,
the stairs painfully, leaning on the arm of a confidential valet,
“Perhaps I should have done better to stay in her room,” murmured
a ray of light showed through, to betray that there was life
out.”
“What can he say? I am his friend, and was uneasy about him, as
impatience, and his hand approached the musket.

we shall see Bussy come out of the window.”


servant, preceding him by some steps, announced M. de Monsoreau.

“The dust on your clothes.”

“Speak, then.”
HOW M. LE DUC D’ANJOU SIGNED, AND AFTER HAVING SIGNED, SPOKE.


“How so?”

“Monseigneur will permit me to observe that he is more than the
“They told me all, knowing me to be the confidant of your highness.”

with impatience; the bourgeois league together; our emissaries
“Your highness is in error; your brother’s throne will only come
“He is a Huguenot.”
“They are men of war.”

five paters and five aves.”

“Have you never heard of a holy man who preaches sermons, and
them now, hanging to her side; they are charming scissors, made
“Monseigneur forgets the abdication.”
“Ah!”
“Words are not enough.”

“Let them think as they like; at all events I will choose my own
“They would dare?” said he.
“But M. de Guise must draw up the agreement.”

“Do not run about the streets with Aurilly, as you did just now.”
“Monsieur, you menace me!” cried François, pale with rage.
“No, I am not; prove your words.”
“No, by the window.”
“I swear it.”
A PROMENADE AT THE TOURNELLES.



“With sword and dagger.”
“So be it.”


“Whom? your minions?”
these gentlemen?”
“He is intoxicating them; he is a dangerous man.”
“I would go to the end of the world to see such a thing.”
“You are intolerable, M. Chicot.”
mask from his face, cried, “Go out from here.”




shoulder.
the lead; it is my custom in the mêlée.”

man and man, which places the swords in our hands; it is the

“Reflect, then, sire, and let us act, who are only soldiers,”
“Excuse me, monsieur,” said Henri, “the king absolves from oaths
“Sire, if you do so we will all go barefooted, and with cords


“Adieu, my little lions,” replied the Gascon, “I go to the Hôtel
he rallied, and began to watch, himself; but as he discovered
teaching them new thrusts, and, above all, exercising D’Epernon, to
suspected nothing. On the morning of the great day, the weather
“What do you want?”
your friend; you will not repent it, Valois, on the faith of
“Return to the Louvre, for a collation.”





“Yes, sire.”

At this moment Quelus and Schomberg entered. The king received
“Your departure will be publicly known.”

“Gentlemen,” said the king, who had finished his toilet, “to St.
The evening before M. de Monsoreau had returned to his home from
“How so?”
“Well! I, who am not the Duc d’Anjou, who love my friends for
his favorites.”
and a traitor; a coward, capable, from jealous or fear, of

abandon me, and then I owe him nothing, and I will abandon him in
waited for the king in his room, and for his gentlemen in the

king, it is a double reason for excusing myself,” replied Bussy;
“Monseigneur, I have worked enough for you; I will work again

“I have determined to revenge myself; I fear now but one thing.”
less the master than the keeper--yes, Aurilly, he is condemned

Bravery was never one of D’Epernon’s prominent qualities, and
“Peste! I will break the engagement.”
“And if it be, it is lawful to prevent an assassination by----”
“Very natural.”

“Of what?”

“But I must know who it is.”

THE PROCESSION.
his Angevins. Next came the principal courtiers, and then the
them all. Then, turning to the prior, Joseph Foulon, “Here I am,
with joy and triumph. Certainly, they were not monkish or peaceful
“Shall we have enough bourgeois guards to make head against Crillon
“The plan is good, and cannot fail,” said the duchess. “It is

upon seeing the king, and will force the gates of the abbey if

esteem, and I will make him general of the army in Italy, where
“The king is returning,” said the Duc de Guise; “let us become
crown at the feet of the eternal king?”
suddenly.


“Oh! I have right of absolution, and I absolve myself in advance.
“Leave me at least a little time for reflection.”
“Read him the act,” said a voice, and a monk passed a paper to
“I feared so,” said the duke to his sister. Then, turning to his
“He wishes to reflect again,” said Gorenflot.


“What shall we do?” said a monk. “Here is Crillon, with his guards,
“Yes, sire,” replied Crillon, giving a tremendous blow with a

As the king spoke and the conspirators listened, they passed

sound continued to go further and further off. His laugh began to

“Silence, and answer me.”

“You lie; I should have seen them repass before this cell.”


hole had taken off successively all the loose clothing which



CHAPTER XC.
he read so much joy, hope, and happiness, that all his jealousy

“Because I would have taken you with me.”

attacked as one. Secondly, because I have a great deal of good
something Homeric, gigantic, impossible; I wish people to speak

but boldly through the door, which Gertrude opened for him. Then
of the city. He said to me, ‘St. Luc, walk about the streets of

“Did he know you?”
“To the Rue de la Tixanderie.”

“Well! let us run. You know the house?”
CHAPTER XCI.
“And then,” said she, “are you not acknowledged to be the bravest
prudent, my too courageous hero--that is all I ask. Act like
you more prudent--I shall have the courage to witness this duel.”
all things, take care to stand so that I can see you; you will


others advanced. Bussy put Diana back, and drew his sword.
wife alone, and fears she may be afraid, so he comes to keep


“I swear to you, monsieur,” said Bussy, “that when I have satisfied
“It was he who sent me.”



her from Bussy, seemed an enemy to her.



And rushing forward, he gave three thrusts, and three times he
and sought him with his eyes among his assailants, but he stood
was surrounded; the blade of his sword bent and shook in his
the key. Sublime with rage, he rushed on Monsoreau, and wounded
his dagger. The young man seized a sword which lay near, and
slain, nearly dying as he was, experienced a feeling of pride.
But at that moment he heard steps coming up the staircase; it
killed Monsoreau!”

at the windows.
“And Diana?”
HOW BROTHER GORENFLOT FOUND HIMSELF MORE THAN EVER BETWEEN A GALLOWS
he heard and recognized the royal voice.
“I, who drank so well, that you always called me the king of
“Do you pardon me?”
“Perhaps.”

unknown to us.”

“Ah! you have made a prisoner,” said Crillon, laying his large

“It was he who recounted to me the whole plot, from the alpha
relieved.
to take him with me.”

majesty.”


“Oh! I am waiting for my saint.”

“M. d’Epernon is just coming in, sire,” replied the man.
“Now go to bed,” continued Henri, “and sleep if you can.”

“So brave that I do not understand it,” said Chicot.

“Well! to-day I shall be tranquil.”
“Ah! if you saw Autragues’s! Is that all that reassures you?”
 murmured the king, as he stooped and imprinted a light kiss on
“Look!” said he.
“Yes, I know that; but still I should like to be sure they are
“Yes, he is waiting below.”

followed him.
François bowed.
to you.”


“Do not torment yourself so, my king, it is useless.”
“He will not fight.”





who knew what was to take place, “If we are conquerors, Crillon,
a little milliner whom he adored, Ribeirac had written to his
“Oh!” said Antragues, “I know where he is; the king ordered a
“One could see well from there, and I am sure poor Diana will
quick, for we wish to arrive first.”
“The door has been forced,” said Antragues; and seizing the ladder,
“Yes.”

“Monsoreau!” cried Livarot.
“It is cowardly! it is infamous!”
“Bussy,” cried the others, “we swear to kill them or die.”

“Ah! the brave man par excellence--is he, then, afraid?”
“No; how should we?”

that you might not see the lightning of those eyes, which dazzled
“With doublets or without?” said Schomberg.
“But he has no dagger, M. Antragues,” cried Chicot, who had just
drunkards or robbers, who made a sleeping-place of it by night.
“Come away, bravest of the brave,” said Chicot, “or else you will
Ribeirac struck up his sword, and wounded him in the side.
Ribeirac was mortally wounded, and Schomberg rushed on him and gave
but he began to feel tired, so he pushed aside Quelus’ sword and
Livarot fell back again, fainting.
he threw his arms round him.
by demons.

Antragues picked up his own sword, which he had dropped, then


your majesty.”
“Here, St. Luc!” cried he. “What is it? But, mon Dieu! what is
“Sire, you do not love him, I know; but he was faithful, and,

The Duc d’Anjou had just entered, and St. Luc’s words had enlightened
“I will name him, sire, to clear your majesty from so heinous

entreat them for help, for in these two men he had the right to
against your majesty.”
terror.
words, three blows were struck slowly and solemnly on the door
“Which is the third?”--“Quelus.”
Henri was inconsolable. He raised three magnificent tombs for
then, dear M. Chicot; come, with the king, M. d’Epernon, and M.
Heaven.”

followed the cavalcade as far as the door of the wine-shop. The host
not to be innocent.

is not so bad as you say, monsieur provost.”
The marquis knocked on the table, and gave every indication of being
“True, so I am,” said the marquis, letting his arms fall by his side.
moustache, turning on his heel and looking cautiously around; then he
“Confound it all, marquis, I can’t believe you are such a blackguard as

girl trembled from head to foot, and could not say a word. The marquis

“Where is my horse?”

back to his door, holding his breath: the girl was awaiting him on the
The marquis for the last time pressed with his mouth those lips but
tear across the kitchen garden, drive his horse against the hurdle,
horsemen instead of helping them; nevertheless, after a quarter of an
sentinel, mounted on a valuable horse, and more than two hundred yards
longer at full gallop. When he felt pretty sure of having shaken the
blood, which, added to the disorder of his clothes and the dust with
went to collect what was wanted—wine, water, fruit, and a large piece of
the country.”
As this news was not encouraging, the marquis, after a few more
first a prey to the most grievous anxiety, had great difficulty in

“Yes, good people,” continued the furious provost, “this is the nice boy

“You are a very ceremonious fellow!” cried the horseman. “Go and tell M.
to M. de Saint-Geran relative to the accusation brought against him.

marriage was a very happy one but for one circumstance—it produced no
to her.
giving him the command of the finest fortune in the province.

thought only of forwarding his suit with Madame-de Bouille, when, at the
Madame de Bouille gave him no trouble; he affected the most violent
not to conceive, a bad action, who was placed in authority over the
appearance of a courier who had come post haste from Paris; he entered
indulging in all kinds of gaieties; and that so far as other matters
deceived by trifling symptoms, that people had wished to flatter their
the loss of a puny creature without mind, interest, or consequence;
It was a triumphal reception: all the peasants had left their work, and
occasion or another, convinced themselves as to its genuineness, and
increase her regret, and incessantly stirred up her ill-humour by
The Marquis de Saint-Maixent had a confidential servant, cunning,
servant.
that the only persons privy to her misdeeds were unfortunate creatures
“be calm, I beg; for it is I, not you, who have any cause for emotion. I
came in so hurriedly that I had not time to see whom I was talking to.
his fingers.
times rather than see this mystery unravelled.”


and violated the laws of hospitality by seducing her daughter in her own
“Madame,” replied the marquis, “I fear only one thing in the world, the
“I don’t know about that, but this I do” know, that I shall take very

“Oh, sir, that is a great crime you speak of!”
weeping copiously.
“Ah! that is my affair. Take my whole fortune! Take my life!”
“Oh, madame, you save my honour, which is dearer to me than life! But
hour later they were galloping through the night, without her knowing
treatment of this woman, who appeared modest and diffident to a degree,
ridicule these humble country experts, who often through observation and
about.


She was a woman of plain and severe exterior, who at once inspired
marquis had employed all this time in strengthening Madame de Bouille
pangs of labour in the chapel of the chateau, where she was hearing
Everything seemed to favour the projects of these last two persons, who
tenderness, said that everyone must retire, leaving the patient in the
everything was going on well, and that shortly their wishes would be
himself a prey to the agonies of nervousness which accompany the
child, had taken it into a corner. Baulieu watched her movements, and
Baulieu swaddled the child immediately, put it in a basket, hid it under
The heat was excessive, his horse was done up, the child seemed uneasy.

country, and here they lost their way.
were by were filled with amazement at her audacity, that she had not

that she had given birth to one. The midwife with great effrontery told
grief gave rise to the greatest anxiety. The midwife, who knew not how
the midwife administered violent remedies to deprive her of milk; she
she launched out into a more expensive style of living; the neighbours
The entry in the register was as follows:
further saying that she regretted it all the more, as the nurse would
thought fit to give the name and condition of this second son to the
was an uncle in good circumstances, who would not charge himself with
of family; but he succeeded in pacifying her by pointing out the
and said to Baulieu, “I shall not put him in my women’s coach; I shall
compensated the loss he derived from the marchioness’s breach of faith.
praised its beauty, saying “c’etait un beau lieu”; he replied by a pun

masters overburdened with kind treatment, that they ought to love him,
The count thought it was some trifling irregularity, some
Saint-Geran footmen, and taken to the Conciergerie of the Palace of
immediately, and appeared disconcerted.
any ill-will on the part of my husband?”
precaution. She consulted the count and the countess dowager. They
When the dowager countess heard this statement, she demanded that this
Marquis de Saint Maixent. On the other hand, no sooner was she under
the marchioness’s service, had shaken her fist in her face, feeling
Having thus fortified her position, she thought herself secure against
grandson of a marshal of France and son of a governor of a province.”
Information of these matters coming to the ears of justice, decisive

made to the Count de Saint-Geran and the deposition of the priest who
marchioness hid her remorse in solitude, and appeared again no more. She

midwife’s nails on his head, as by his fair hair and blue eyes. This
at the hotel de Saint-Geran, went to see the child, kept in her house as
count, and the Countess de Lude, daughter of the Marchioness de Bouille,
truth it is incredible that they could have fought the case so long aid

the youth added that he had concealed this fact so long as it might
opposition and appeals of the appellants and the defendants; condemns
ladies, who had taken la Pigoreau in their coach to all the hearings,

desiring them to bring the lawsuit to an end. His last words were for
parties to the lawsuit in the Tournelle.
The countess thus returned to her first battlefield. Legal science
de Longaunay, dated 12th August 1658,”
April, and 2nd June, 1666, are dismissed with costs;
Possibly a more obstinate legal contest was never waged, on both sides,

