TREASURE ISLAND

                  Kingston, or Ballantyne the brave,
     4.  THE SEA-CHEST  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
     My Shore Adventure
     19.  NARRATIVE RESUMED BY JIM HAWKINS:
     PART SIX
TREASURE ISLAND
SQUIRE TRELAWNEY, Dr. Livesey, and the rest of these gentlemen having
often afterwards:
My father told him no, very little company, the more was the pity.
the Royal George, that he had inquired what inns there were along the
(as now and then some did, making by the coast road for Bristol) he
the surf roared along the cove and up the cliffs, I would see him in a
shaking with "Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum," all the neighbours joining
crimes that he described. My father was always saying the inn would be
father out of the room. I have seen him wringing his hands after such a
father was far gone in a decline that took him off. Dr. Livesey came

"Silence, there, between decks!"
hang at the next assizes."

paying much regard to our unpleasant guest.
was a pale, tallowy creature, wanting two fingers of the left hand, and
"Is this here table for my mate Bill?" he asked with a kind of leer.

sneering, patted me on the shoulder, told me I was a good boy and he had
cleared the hilt of his cutlass and loosened the blade in the sheath;
so old and sick.
well, then, speak up; what is it?"
For a long time, though I certainly did my best to listen, I could hear
notch on the lower side of the frame to this day.

the stranger. I got the rum, to be sure, and tried to put it down his
in several places. "Heres luck," "A fair wind," and "Billy Bones his
and looked mistily about him. First he recognized the doctor with
you take one youll take another and another, and I stake my wig if you
"This is nothing," he said as soon as he had closed the door. "I have

to me; and if Im not to have my rum now Im a poor old hulk on a lee

But Im a saving soul. I never wasted good money of mine, nor lost it

on me, or unless you see that Black Dog again or a seafaring man with
his confessions and make an end of me. But as things fell out, my poor
my fathers death. I have said the captain was weak, and indeed he
So things passed until, the day after the funeral, and about three


was so utterly terrified of the blind beggar that I forgot my terror of
which closed upon it instantly.
Even as he did so, he reeled, put his hand to his throat, stood swaying

approaching footsteps; and what between the dead body of the captain
wash of the ripple and the croaking of the inmates of the wood.
comrade of the captains was enough to frighten them to death. And the
out at our foolhardiness, but even then not a man would go along with
I slipped the bolt at once, and we stood and panted for a moment in the
have till ten tonight."
Overcoming a strong repugnance, I tore open his shirt at the neck, and
brushed and folded. They had never been worn, my mother said. Under
gold.
heart into my mouth--the tap-tapping of the blind mans stick upon the
content with less. It was not yet seven, she said, by a long way; she
the tavern door that a thin veil still hung unbroken to conceal the
as she was, to the edge of the bank, where, sure enough, she gave a sigh
MY curiosity, in a sense, was stronger than my fear, for I could not
surprised to find the door open. But the pause was brief, for the blind
I could hear their feet rattling up our old stairs, so that the

"Sure enough, they left their glim here," said the fellow from the
effect upon the buccaneers, a signal to warn them of approaching danger.
be as rich as kings if you could find it, and you know its here, and
heavily on more than one.
remained behind, tapping up and down the road in a frenzy, and groping
and passed by. He fell on his side, then gently collapsed upon his face
continued to deplore the balance of the money. In the meantime the
I went back with him to the Admiral Benbow, and you cannot imagine a

"Dogger," said Mr. Dance, "you have a good horse; take up this lad
house was all dark to the front.
either hand on great old gardens. Here Mr. Dance dismounted, and taking

At last Mr. Dance finished the story.
coat.


"Very well," said the doctor. "Now, then, if Jim is agreeable, well
Bones, mate," "No more rum," "Off Palm Key he got itt," and some other
17 20", 19o 2 40"."
long ago."
pocket. The doctor opened the seals with great care, and there fell out
     the N. of N.N.E.
That was all; but brief as it was, and to me incomprehensible, it filled
man Im afraid of."
be as silent as the grave."

hunted us, but in all my fancies nothing occurred to me so strange and
     The ship is bought and fitted.  She lies at
"Well, whos a better right?" growled the gamekeeper. "A pretty rum go
     So far there was not a hitch.  The
     all the seafaring men in Bristol, had lost his
     but it was a crew I had discovered.  Between
     yet I shall not enjoy a moment till I hear my old
     man, which I regret, but in all other respects a
     J. T.
there I found my mother in good health and spirits. The captain, who had
The night passed, and the next day, after dinner, Redruth and I were
broken a long time.
ocean. I saw, besides, many old sailors, with rings in their ears, and
Bravo! The ships company complete!"
find the place by following the line of the docks and keeping a bright

what a buccaneer was like--a very different creature, according to me,
And he took my hand in his large firm grasp.

on that Black--Black Dog before, did you, now?"
"Do you call that a head on your shoulders, or a blessed dead-eye?"
blind beggar, he used."
finding Black Dog at the Spy-glass, and I watched the cook narrowly. But
and broached him to in a brace of old shakes, I would; but now--"
wont do. Dooty is dooty, messmates. Ill put on my old cockerel hat,
anecdote of ships or seamen or repeating a nautical phrase till I had
Long John took up his crutch and departed.
"To be sure he may," says squire. "Take your hat, Hawkins, and well see
squint. He and the squire were very thick and friendly, but I soon
"Well, Captain Smollett, what have you to say? All well, I hope; all

"Next," said the captain, "I learn we are going after treasure--hear




own people, and provided with all the arms and powder on board. In other
wig, you meant more than this."
"Trelawney," said the doctor, "contrary to all my notions, I believed
overhauled; six berths had been made astern out of what had been the
shore-boat.


the men bustling to their places in the glimmer of the ships lanterns.

which require to be known.
he were drunk, and if he were sober deny solemnly that he ever tasted
very useful, for he often took a watch himself in easy weather. And the
himself from one place to another, now using the crutch, now trailing it

Malabar, and Surinam, and Providence, and Portobello. She was at the
chaplain." And John would touch his forelock with a solemn way he had
chin in air.

bravest spirits because we were now so near an end of the first part of
against it, and I was just about to jump up when the man began to speak.
of my timber leg. The same broadside I lost my leg, old Pew lost his
"Davis was a man too, by all accounts," said Silver. "I never sailed

in their pockets. Now, the most goes for rum and a good fling, and to

to sea with them. Well now, I tell you, Im not a boasting man, and you
common pirate, and the little scene that I had overheard was the last

squire and doctor shall find the stuff, and help us to get it aboard,

"So?" says Silver. "Well, and where are they now? Pew was that sort,

You may fancy the terror I was in! I should have leaped out and run for
that tended to the same purpose, this whole clause was audible: "Not

and rising behind one of them a third and higher hill, whose peak was
"The anchorage is on the south, behind an islet, I fancy?" asked the
fresh look of the paper I knew he was doomed to disappointment. This
"Thank you, my man," says Captain Smollett. "Ill ask you later on to
may lay to that. When you want to go a bit of exploring, you just ask

land that we have sighted is the place we have been sailing for. Mr.
subsided.
I did as I was bid, and as short as I could make it, told the whole
"No more an ass than I, sir," returned the captain. "I never heard of a
"First point," began Mr. Smollett. "We must go on, because we cant turn
up for himself before he lit on Silver."
"Jim here," said the doctor, "can help us more than anyone. The men are

Grey-coloured woods covered a large part of the surface. This even tint
standing still and being rolled about like a bottle was a thing I never
three or four miles round the corner of the island and up the narrow
chains got everywhere more water than was down in the chart, John never
there. Two little rivers, or rather two swamps, emptied out into this
fever here."
when there was nothing else to do, he kept up one song after another, as

sorts. A turn ashorell hurt nobody--the boats are still in the water;
honest hands--and I was soon to see it proved that there were such on
had no present need of my assistance. It occurred to me at once to go

that I was in.
hissed at me with a noise not unlike the spinning of a top. Little did
a wild duck flew up with a quack, another followed, and soon over the


wild uns knew it, whered I be, Tom--now, tell me, whered I be?"
score of times; the whole troop of marsh-birds rose again, darkening
"Hands off, if you like, John Silver," said the other. "Its a black
And with that, this brave fellow turned his back directly on the cook
I do not know what it rightly is to faint, but I do know that for the
But now John put his hand into his pocket, brought out a whistle, and

some nearer seventy, feet high. The air too smelt more freshly than down
with great rapidity behind the trunk of a pine. What it was, whether
adversary. From trunk to trunk the creature flitted like a deer, running
have been watching me closely, for as soon as I began to move in his
features were even pleasing. His skin, wherever it was exposed, was
punishment common enough among the buccaneers, in which the offender
my hands, looking at my boots, and generally, in the intervals of
"Jim, Jim," says he, quite pleased apparently. "Well, now, Jim, Ive
Ill be good, and I see the way to. And, Jim"--looking all round him and
At this I had a happy inspiration. I began to believe that I had found
He was still holding me by the wrist, and at that he give it quite a
remark?"

thunder! Thats what he said.

precious sight, mind that--in a genleman born than in these genleman



his safety. With the men in the temper they were in, it seemed an even
"Lillibullero" stopped off, and I could see the pair discussing what
stout loghouse fit to hold two score of people on a pinch and loopholed
the Duke of Cumberland, and got a wound myself at Fontenoy--but I know

latter hailed the coxswain, who was the principal man aboard.
these six very faint-hearted seamen.
laden, and tossed our stores over the palisade. Then, leaving Joyce to
loading the boat for our very lives. Pork, powder, and biscuit was the

There was a pause.
We were clear out of the ship, but not yet ashore in our stockade.
and the tails of my coat were all soaking wet before we had gone a
I was steering, while he and Redruth, two fresh men, were at the oars.
where we should get ashore, besides the chance of being boarded by the
"I have thought of that," said I, for I made sure he was thinking of a
At any risk, we put the boats head direct for the landing-place. By
Hands, if possible," said the captain.
who fell.
"Theyll have a hot run, sir," returned the captain. "Jack ashore, you


woods along shore, and we had not only the danger of being cut off from

the beginning of the bustle, hung a moment on his heel to see that all
the business: one of the enemy actually fell, and the rest, without

crying like a child.
after, without another word, he passed away.

large allowance, sir, for all the gifts of Providence, I should say we
"Oho!" said the captain. "Blaze away! Youve little enough powder
All through the evening they kept thundering away. Ball after ball flew
with them to one of the gigs that lay close by, pulling an oar or so to
     mutineers; James Hawkins, cabin-boy--

reckon your friends has had the best of it; and here they are ashore in

"Good," said I, "and now may I go?"
For a good hour to come frequent reports shook the island, and
Even as I looked, there came another red flash and another report that
feet, I saw, some distance further down the spit and rising from among
kind--no other than a great ships kettle of iron, with the bottom
wood still flourished high and dense, all of fir on the land side, but
under the Union Jack.
"That man Smollett," he said once, "is a better man than I am. And when
"Yes, sir, cheese," I answered.

before a week.
"Flag of truce!" I heard someone say; and then, immediately after, with
standing placidly by.
"Who goes? Stand, or we fire."

talk to you. If you wish to talk to me, you can come, thats all. If
to be of the slightest use as sentry; indeed, I had already deserted
better sit down."

"Well?" says Captain Smollett as cool as can be.
"Oh, well, you have, I know that," returned Long John. "You neednt be
island blown clean out of the water into blazes first. So theres my
"Now," resumed Silver, "here it is. You give us the chart to get the
pipe in the palm of his left hand.
you so; and theyre the last good words youll get from me, for in the
along the sand till he got hold of the porch and could hoist himself


On the two short sides of the house, east and west, there were only two
your post to eat it," continued Captain Smollett. "Lively, now, my lad;


a string of geese, from every side of the enclosure. Several bullets
west."
huzza, a little cloud of pirates leaped from the woods on the north side

Meanwhile a third, running unharmed all around the house, appeared
snatching another, gave me a cut across the knuckles which I hardly
foot in the soft sand, rolled headlong down the slope.
had disposed of at a blow. Of the four who had scaled the palisade, one

leaves us four to nine. Thats better odds than we had at starting. We

breathed--that one of the pirates who had been shot at the loophole,
when he could help it.
of his mouth and fairly forgot to put it back again, so thunder-struck
stifling hot and the little patch of sand inside the palisade ablaze
I was a fool, if you like, and certainly I was going to do a foolish,
a way of doing it as made the thing itself wrong. But I was only a boy,
observation from the anchorage. It was already late in the afternoon,
earshot of their noise.
always recognize--while a couple of men were leaning over the stern
I saw I must lose no time if I were to find the boat that evening.
for me, and I can hardly imagine that it could have floated with a
her go ashore where she fancied. I had quite made up my mind that the
One was the great fire on shore, by which the defeated pirates lay

and I am very sure I never should have made the ship at all but for the

and cut one strand after another, till the vessel swung only by two.
were furiously angry. Oaths flew like hailstones, and every now and
And I thought it was a ditty rather too dolefully appropriate for a
since I found I could not push the coracle directly off, I now shoved
By this time the schooner and her little consort were gliding pretty
The endless ballad had come to an end at last, and the whole diminished
over with a sharp, bristling sound and slightly phosphorescent. The
the companion ladder and I knew that the two drunkards had at last been

fringed with great masses of fallen rock. I was scarce a quarter of a
I have understood since that they were sea lions, and entirely harmless.
Haulbowline Head behind me and reserve my strength for an attempt to
paddling. But even a small change in the disposition of the weight will
sea-cap; then, getting my eye once more above the gunwale, I set myself
weak stroke or two to turn her head to shore.
opened out, I beheld a sight that changed the nature of my thoughts.
going about in chase. At last, however, she fell right into the winds
to her captain.
coracle among the waves, with only now and then a blow upon her bows and
and banging on the deck, she still continued to run away from me, not
she filled on the port tack and was off again, stooping and skimming
between the stay and the brace; and as I still clung there panting, a

There were the two watchmen, sure enough: red-cap on his back, as stiff
ghastly to behold--neither his attitude nor his fixed teeth-disclosing
which told of pain and deadly weakness, and the way in which his jaw
It was such a scene of confusion as you can hardly fancy. All the
for myself I routed out some biscuit, some pickled fruits, a great bunch

"By the by," I continued, "I cant have these colours, Mr. Hands; and by
back to my meal with a good appetite.
after all. I can see, cant I? Ive tried my fling, I have, and Ive
he had eaten a little and had a swallow or two more of the brandy, he
had made. I should, I think, have had nothing left me to desire but for
THE wind, serving us to a desire, now hauled into the west. We could run
"This heres an unlucky ship, this HISPANIOLA, Jim," he went on,
up free, and Ill take it kind if youd step down into that there cabin
conceal my suspicions to the end.

North Inlet to the camp among the swamps or whether he would fire Long


knives going, and what not. Well, now I tell you, I never seen good come
Scarcely had we passed the heads before the land closed around us. The
"And once beached," I inquired, "how shall we get her off again?"
The excitement of these last manoeuvres had somewhat interfered with the
sideways towards the bows. As I did so, I let go of the tiller, which
with his haste and fury. I had no time to try my other pistol, nor
courage had begun to rise so high that I allowed myself a few darting
rattle. Blow and all, I was the first afoot again, for Hands had got
and recharge it afresh from the beginning.
new-found security, I laughed aloud. At last, with a swallow or two, he
it was by my own volition, and I am sure it was without a conscious
nearer to the ship and fell between me and the bulwarks. He rose once to
still green water, beside the body of the coxswain.
These last I broke through with a sudden jerk, and then regained the
adventures had worn off almost all my terror for the dead, I took him
east, the cordage had begun to sing a little softly to itself and the
I remember, falling through a glade of the wood and shining bright as
and ready for our own men to board and get to sea again. I had nothing
This brought me near to where I had encountered Ben Gunn, the maroon;
Suddenly a kind of brightness fell about me. I looked up; a pale glimmer
the trees. It was red and hot, and now and again it was a little
by the captains orders, somewhat niggardly of firewood, and I began to
bad watch. If it had been Silver and his lads that were now creeping
and groaned, but without awaking.
voice of Silver cried, "Who goes?"

perished, and my heart smote me sorely that I had not been there to
torn with the sharp briers of the wood.

he is. Just you keep clear of the capn. The doctor himself is gone dead
youll jine; and if you dont, Jim, why, youre free to answer no--free

was thoughtful enough to cut, and in a manner of speaking, the whole
"Well, its all that youre to hear, my son," returned Silver.
out. And as for the schooner, it was I who cut her cable, and it was I
it."

"I stood hazing long enough from one," added another. "Ill be hanged if
"Well, youre a gay lot to look at, anyway. Not much worth to fight, you
together towards the far end of the block house, and the low hiss of
right, and steps outside for a council."
mark, I stand by you through thick and thin. I didnt mean to; no, not
life--if so be as I can--from them. But, see here, Jim--tit for tat--you
I have. Im on squires side now. I know youve got that ship safe
further questions.
THE council of buccaneers had lasted some time, when one of them
the moon and torchlight. The rest were all somewhat stooping, as though
it would have been comical to see his slow advance, hesitating as he set

black spot in full council, as in dooty bound; just you turn it over, as
"I thought you said you knowed the rules," returned Silver

and you have the Davy Joness insolence to up and stand for capn over
"Ah, the others!" returned John. "Theyre a nice lot, aint they? You
with your head broke--or you, George Merry, that had the ague shakes

Silver suddenly sprang up, and supporting himself with a hand against


round, we lay down to sleep, and the outside of Silvers vengeance was

insubordinate and stealthy conduct, and when I saw where it had brought
elbow and one hand upon the side of the log-house--quite the old John in
seconds before he seemed able to move on.
"Youre doing well, my friend," he said to the fellow with the bandaged

than many, take you all round; but you dont appear to me to have the
Silver struck the barrel with his open hand.
reckon you can yarn through the spars. Good day to you, sir, and all our



breakfast.
cant have this. Whip over, and well run for it."
water. At half tide she must be high and dry."
treasure."


since the attack failed, and I owe it you. And now, Jim, were to go in
were bold enough for a brush and be done with it, I could see their
his own at the same time.
would prefer wealth and freedom with the pirates to a bare escape from
the quest for treasure.
midday meal. All the stores, I observed, came from our stock, and I

called the Mizzen-mast Hill. The top of the plateau was dotted thickly

I followed--I tethered by my rope, he ploughing, with deep pants, among
skeleton lay, with a few shreds of clothing, on the ground. I believe a
feet pointing in one direction, his hands, raised above his head like a
every man; and this one he hauled here and laid down by compass, shiver
me."
for the rum, and now he sang. Fifteen Men were his only song, mates;

of open sea upon the east. Sheer above us rose the Spyglass, here dotted



the rum, Darby!"

And the rest were all too terrified to reply. They would have run away
and no mistake. Bout ship, mates! This here crew is on a wrong tack, I
"Why, nobody minds Ben Gunn," cried Merry; "dead or alive, nobody minds
aint no good to swear by, what do you suppose a sperrit would give for
other, looked ever wider over that western bay where I had once tossed
their heads; their feet grew speedier and lighter; their whole soul


All was clear to probation. The CACHE had been found and rifled; the
others had had time to realize the disappointment.
with their fingers, throwing the boards aside as they did so. Morgan




Pretty well, I thank ye, says you."
the north-east angle of the island, and there it had lain stored in
That morning, finding that I was to be involved in the horrid
"Not a thought," replied Dr. Livesey cheerily.
the voice of Silver joined as heartily as any.
of my escapade either in the way of blame or praise. At Silvers polite
floor was sand. Before a big fire lay Captain Smollett; and in a far
man?"

went with the boat, while the rest during their absences piled treasure
have found a place in that collection; and for number, I am sure they

"Drunk or raving," said he.
let alone yourself, seeing as I know what I owes you. But these men down
That was about our last doing on the island. Before that, we had got the
to find them. But they continued to call us by name and appeal to us,
We were so short of men that everyone on board had to bear a hand--only
to pass the early part of the night. Here they met the captain of an
I think we were all pleased to be so cheaply quit of him.
with the desire to rise, also studied his profession, and he is now
The bar silver and the arms still lie, for all that I know, where
STORY OF THE DOOR
inclined to help rather than to reprove. “I incline to Cain’s heresy,”
well-known man about town. It was a nut to crack for many, what these
so that the shop fronts stood along that thoroughfare with an air of
and distained. Tramps slouched into the recess and struck matches on the

like a man; it was like some damned Juggernaut. I gave a few halloa,
with desire to kill him. I knew what was in his mind, just as he knew
to get the money; and where do you think he carried us but to that place
a body to the bank. I gave in the cheque myself, and said I had every

change their name. No sir, I make it a rule of mine: the more it looks
The pair walked on again for a while in silence; and then “Enfield,”
never saw a man I so disliked, and yet I scarce know why. He must be
it already. You see, Richard, your tale has gone home. If you have been

a clouded brow to study its contents. The will was holograph, for Mr.
name was but a name of which he could learn no more. It was worse when
Dr. Lanyon sat alone over his wine. This was a hearty, healthy, dapper,

and being a man of no scientific passions (except in the matter of
problem. Hitherto it had touched him on the intellectual side alone; but
houses, or move the more swiftly and still the more swiftly, even to

audible on either side of the roadway; and the rumour of the approach
for the door, crossing the roadway to save time; and as he came, he drew
blowing in the key. And then suddenly, but still without looking up,
should have my address.” And he gave a number of a street in Soho.

perplexity. The problem he was thus debating as he walked, was one of a

warmed (after the fashion of a country house) by a bright, open fire,
“I saw Mr. Hyde go in by the old dissecting room, Poole,” he said. “Is
see very little of him on this side of the house; he mostly comes and
by chance some Jack-in-the-Box of an old iniquity should leap to light
transparency, the strange clauses of the will.
lawyer, when the light-hearted and loose-tongued had already their foot
were by my will; unless it were that hide-bound pedant, Lanyon, at what
The large handsome face of Dr. Jekyll grew pale to the very lips, and
“My good Utterson,” said the doctor, “this is very good of you, this
“Well, but since we have touched upon this business, and for the last
Utterson heaved an irrepressible sigh. “Well,” said he, “I promise.”
which the maid’s window overlooked, was brilliantly lit by the full
of disposition, yet with something high too, as of a well-founded

body,” said he; “this may be very serious. Have the kindness to wait
was, he recognized it for one that he had himself presented many years
marvelous number of degrees and hues of twilight; for here it would be
and showed him a dingy street, a gin palace, a low French eating house,
had seen him till yesterday.
otherwise empty, Mr. Hyde had only used a couple of rooms; but these


structure with curiosity, and gazed round with a distasteful sense of

words, he will never more be heard of.”

looked for; and he blamed himself for some of his past suspicions.


calculated distance from the fire, a bottle of a particular old wine
well, then, that he should see a letter which put that mystery to
it is; quite in your way: a murderer’s autograph.”
paper alongside and sedulously compared their contents. “Thank you,

death of Sir Danvers was resented as a public injury; but Mr. Hyde had
He was busy, he was much in the open air, he did good; his face seemed
There at least he was not denied admittance; but when he came in, he was
question of weeks. Well, life has been pleasant; I liked it; yes, sir,
“Nothing can be done,” returned Lanyon; “ask himself.”
in drift. The quarrel with Lanyon was incurable. “I do not blame our old
and words, there must lie for it some deeper ground.
disappearance; here again, as in the mad will which he had long ago
was perhaps relieved to be denied admittance; perhaps, in his heart, he
INCIDENT AT THE WINDOW
this was a back way to Dr. Jekyll’s! It was partly your own fault that I

is to stay down here and speak with you from where we are.”




otherwise; never in his life had he been conscious of so sharp a wish to
“Amen, Poole,” said the lawyer.
“What, what? Are you all here?” said the lawyer peevishly. “Very

so, once more violently signed to the lawyer to give ear.

 said Poole. “All this last week (you must know) him, or it, whatever it
Poole felt in his pocket and handed out a crumpled note, which the
“The man at Maw’s was main angry, sir, and he threw it back to me like
at the far end of the room digging among the crates. He looked up when
enough, Poole, ay, and appalling to consider; but it is plain and
make certain. Much as I desire to spare your master’s feelings, much as
the kitchen poker for yourself.”
bigness; and it had the same quick, light way with it; and then who else
monkey jumped from among the chemicals and whipped into the cabinet, it
an end of it. Poole, here, and I are going to force our way into the
moving to and fro along the cabinet floor.
“Weeping? how that?” said the lawyer, conscious of a sudden chill of

succeeded, stood back a little and peered in. There lay the cabinet
self-destroyer.
crazy lumber, mostly dating from the times of the surgeon who was
“Use!” echoed Poole. “Do you not see, sir, it is broken? much as if a
even as he spoke, the kettle with a startling noise boiled over.

to serve as a testament in case of death and as a deed of gift in case
be careful. I foresee that we may yet involve your master in some dire

They went out, locking the door of the theatre behind them; and
the man, dined with him, indeed, the night before; and I could
yourself.
Square exactly as it stands.
must appear, you might have charged your conscience with my death or the
soul. It is possible that the post-office may fail me, and this letter
at once for a locksmith and a carpenter. The tradesmen came while we
of a white colour. The phial, to which I next turned my attention,
the honour, the sanity, or the life of my flighty colleague? If his
enter, he did not obey me without a searching backward glance into the
personal distaste, and merely wondered at the acuteness of the symptoms;
me--something seizing, surprising and revolting--this fresh disparity
of your acquaintance. Be seated, if you please.” And I showed him an
own growing curiosity.
moment, in a voice that was already fairly well under control, “Have you

hear you with no very strong impression of belief. But I have gone too
shield me from that prodigy, my mind submerged in terror.
Utterson, and that (if you can bring your mind to credit it) will be
of the wise and good among my fellowmen, and thus, as might have been
provinces of good and ill which divide and compound man’s dual nature.
point. Others will follow, others will outstrip me on the same lines;
twin; and the just could walk steadfastly and securely on his upward
deeply into this scientific branch of my confession. First, because I
an overdose or at the least inopportunity in the moment of exhibition,
strange in my sensations, something indescribably new and, from its very
conception of the day--the inmates of my house were locked in the most
less exhausted. And hence, as I think, it came about that Edward Hyde

prisonhouse of my disposition; and like the captives of Philippi, that
drink the cup, to doff at once the body of the noted professor, and to
Men have before hired bravos to transact their crimes, while their own
Edward Hyde, they soon began to turn toward the monstrous. When I would
I can scarce grant that I committed it) I have no design of entering; I
of my adventures, had returned at a late hour, and woke the next day in
knuckly, of a dusky pallor and thickly shaded with a swart growth of
when I was unable to conceal the alteration in my stature? And then with
to me of late as though the body of Edward Hyde had grown in stature, as
self, and becoming slowly incorporated with my second and worse.
Jekyll would suffer smartingly in the fires of abstinence, Hyde would be
to my determination; for two months, I led a life of such severity as
conscious, even when I took the draught, of a more unbridled, a more
of terror. A mist dispersed; I saw my life to be forfeit; and fled from
life, to arrive again and again, with the same sense of unreality, at
a man high in public estimation. It was not only a crime, it had been a
for licence. Not that I dreamed of resuscitating Hyde; the bare idea of
After all, I reflected, I was like my neighbours; and then I smiled,
observed that in my second character, my faculties seemed sharpened to

composed his two important letters, one to Lanyon and one to Poole; and
still divided him from midnight. Once a woman spoke to him, offering, I
own house and close to my drugs; and gratitude for my escape shone so
as Hyde that I awakened. Under the strain of this continually impending
of community, which in themselves made the most poignant part of
the ape-like tricks that he would play me, scrawling in my own hand
nature. My provision of the salt, which had never been renewed since the
and great good luck. Should the throes of change take me in the act of

     HANDS OF HIS UNCLE, EBENEZER
the torrent of Mr. Henley’s enthusiasm swept him off his feet. However,
counsel in many of the cases. We sent for more books, and yet more,
     Murder of COLIN CAMPBELL of Glenure, Efq;
A letter from James Stewart to Mr. John Macfarlane, introduced as

they went in, and drunk some drams, and Alan Breck renewed the former
that was sent soon after the novel appeared, containing “The Pedigree of
I wanted!” he exclaimed; and the receipt for the “Lily of the Valley
come to fall in the year 1751, how the Torran rocks have crept so near
no more desperate purpose than to steal some young gentleman’s attention
the seats of Burns and his companions. I think I see you, moving there
     II         I COME TO MY JOURNEY’S END
     XVII       THE DEATH OF THE RED FOX

that I lacked for nothing, he took my hand in both of his and clapped it


of Ebenezer Balfour, Esquire, of Shaws, in his house of Shaws, these
be well received, as your poor father forecast for you, and for anything
“Be soople, Davie, in things immaterial,” said he. “Bear ye this in
these four things, the first is your legal due: the little pickle money
the world; then suddenly took me in his arms and embraced me very hard;

of ants for a month, then take it out, and you will find a liquor which
green drove-road running wide through the heather, I took my last look
anchored in the firth; both of which, for as far away as they were, I
to substitute in my inquiries the name of the house of Shaws. It was a
“Ay” said he. “What for?”
“I was led to think that I would get a situation,” I said, looking as
but I was more than a match for him at that, and he went on to his next

the ground, and crack my thumb at it! Black be its fall! If ye see the
rooks in the sky; and every sign of a kind soil and climate; and yet the
the top. A main entrance it was plainly meant to be, but never finished;
I had been coming to? Was it within these walls that I was to seek
could hear the ticking of the clock inside as it slowly counted out the


“Ay,” the man resumed, “he’ll be dead, no doubt; and that’ll be what

and so was the nightgown that he wore, instead of coat and waistcoat,
keeping an eye upon me as he drank; and then suddenly held out his hand.
disappointment, I believe I had burst into tears. As it was, I could
“To give the letter,” said I.
to himself and fell to. “Your father was very fond of his meat, I mind;
change into an altogether different man. From this I was awakened by his

having stumbled after him as best I might; and then he bade me go in,

neighbours--perhaps with Jennet Clouston at their head.
“Na, na,” said he; “I’ll deny you nothing in reason.”
“Whae were these friends o’ yours?”
within your teeth. Nae letters; nae messages; no kind of word to
doubt but I’ll be glad of it, and none but I’ll be grateful.”

lock you out.”

“Na, na; na, na,” he said, very earnestly. “I like you fine; we’ll agree
I RUN A GREAT DANGER IN THE HOUSE OF SHAWS
the fly-leaf of a chap-book (one of Patrick Walker’s) plainly written
clever chappie when I was young. Why, I could read as soon as he could.”
My uncle seemed to make a great effort upon himself. “Dod man, David,”
relative that came, almost a beggar, to his door, unless in his heart he
“Davie,” he said, at length, “I’ve been thinking;” then he paused, and
raillery in which I answered--
When I was called in again, my uncle counted out into my hand seven and
as such near friends should.”
that he would expect me to help him with the house and the bit garden.

pushed out with foot and hand, and presently struck the wall with the
the same passing brightness showed me the steps were of unequal length,
The tower, I should have said, was square; and in every corner the step
head into the storm, and looked along towards the kitchen. The door,
He had found time to open the corner cupboard and bring out a great case
were a few bottles, some apparently of medicine; a great many bills and
not of this world.
“It’s the trouble,” said he, reviving a little; “I have a trouble,
And so weak was he that I could do nothing but consent. I locked him
that, and before the sun began to peep or the last of the stars had
I sat there nursing my knee and smiling at the fire; and I saw myself in
to me?” And then, as he made no articulate reply, “It will be time,
doorstep a half-grown boy in sea-clothes. He had no sooner seen me than

manly. Meanwhile, my uncle had read the letter and sat thinking; then,
losses follow. I have drawn a bill upon you, as per margin, and am, sir,
I stood awhile and thought. I was going to some place of shipping, which
walk.
horribly whenever he remembered, but more like a silly schoolboy than a
for drink; and I tell you I believe it! Why, look’ere;” and turning down
Covenant (for all her pious name) was little better than a hell upon the
where he ran the continual peril of his life, not alone from wind and
sent over-seas to slavery in North America, or the still more unhappy
inn looked pretty lonely at that time of day, for the boat had just gone


“Captain Hoseason,” returned my uncle, “you keep your room unco hot.”
down-stairs and play myself awhile,” I was fool enough to take him at
shirts, some with jackets, some with coloured handkerchiefs about their
set down at a table in the front room of the inn, and both eating and



my mind, as I sat staring before me out of the inn window, and paying

I can get a word with ye.” And then, passing his arm through mine, he
movement and my surprise at our low position, and the appearance of the


a fresh stab of pain, to realise that I must be lying somewhere bound in
by death in the deep sea, was welcome to me. Yet it was no such matter;


sunlight; and though it only showed me the strong, dark beams of the
manner of excuse; I want that boy taken out of this hole and put in the
cool your porridge. We’ll be required on deck,” he added, in a sharper
“In all that time, sir, ye should have learned to know me: I’m a stiff

naething. Man,” said he, “it was me that gave it ye!”
though they had been unclean beasts. No class of man is altogether bad,
fish received them; and it is a thankless business to speak ill of the
came in at times from the round-house, where he berthed and served, now
Countrie;” all else had been blotted out in these years of hardship
health, it was the pitifullest thing in life to see this unhappy,
can picture to yourselves how weary of my life I grew to be, and how
“And in the meantime,” says he, “keep your heart up. You’re not the only

“My man,” said he, “we want ye to serve in the round-house. You and
The brig was sheering swiftly and giddily through a long, cresting
serve, stood some six feet above the decks, and considering the size of
Shuan sitting at the table, with the brandy bottle and a tin pannikin
the table.


which the captain took at regular hours, sitting down with the officer
Mr. Riach and the captain were singularly patient. I could not but fancy

even their pickles, which were the great dainty, I was allowed my share
Riach, perhaps from caution, would never suffer me to say another word
pursued the Covenant upon this voyage grew yet more strongly marked.
Maybe about ten at night, I was serving Mr. Riach and the captain at
his hands free, and for all he was encumbered with a frieze overcoat
that here was a man I would rather call my friend than my enemy.
“Friends of yours?” said Hoseason.
matter of that.”

me will reward you highly for your trouble.”
The other swept back the guineas into the belt, and put it on again
Scotland, the poor tenant bodies take a thought upon their chief lying

navy to carry it across. All this I had, of course, heard tell of; and

two officers were in the waist with their heads together. It struck me
draw.”




have the name of no farm-midden to clap to the hind-end of it.”
open, is the best part of my defences.”
gentleman of decent birth, than scraping plates and raxing* drams to a
leap in upon us kept my heart in a flutter: and the sea, which I heard
I told him, indeed I was no great shot.
to have eyes upon both sides to keep the two of them; for when my face


the wind was steady and kept the sails quiet; so that there was a
It came all of a sudden when it did, with a rush of feet and a roar, and
swang the yard, I cried out: “Take that!” and shot into their midst.
slowly lower, with a terrible, white face; and just as I looked, some of

“It’s what we have to pray for,” said he. “Unless we can give them a
me.
body. He gave the most horrible, ugly groan and fell to the floor. The
thronged with their faces. I thought we were lost, and catching up my
into the forecastle, and clap-to the hatch upon the top.
the while, the flush was in his face, and his eyes were as bright as a

came by the skylight. Four more were hurt, and of that number, one (and

helm, I knew they had even no one at the tiller. Indeed (as I learned
CHAPTER XI
“And depend upon it,” Alan said, “we shall hear more of them ere long.

came to the edge of the round-house, and stood on a coil of rope, so

down upon the deck, to share it (I suppose) with his superior.

Hoseason flushed red.
all weathers, ay, and by night too, for the matter of that.”



CHAPTER XII
deep among the islands; and the wind serving well, he preferred to go by
astern), and smoked a pipe or two of the captain’s fine tobacco. It was
leaden bullet. I would hunt all of that name like blackcocks. If I lay
“You that are so wasteful of your buttons,” said I, “I can hardly think
many more of whom I havenae mind. And when they were through, the King

“Ay” said he, “if they got hands on me, it would be a short shrift and

of mine, buying butter in the market-place, and taking it home in a
“What! two rents?” I repeated.

still lay in the heather, the English rogues, that couldnae come at his
hail-fellow-well-met with Sheamus--that’s James of the Glens, my
the farms to let. And, thinks he, in his black heart, ‘I’ll soon get
Edinburgh--seeking, and fleeching, and begging them to come, where there
harm, and yourself no good. Tell me your tale plainly out. What did he

his children’s hands, he will gang hame singing to Glenure!”
arrest.
never a gun or a sword left from Cantyre to Cape Wrath, but what tenty*
was skilled in all kinds of music, but principally pipe-music; was a
CHAPTER XIII
By the concerned look of his face, and, above all, by the sharp tones in
to wonder what it was that sat so heavily upon the captain, when the
“There!” said Hoseason. “Ye see for yourself. If I had kent of these
“There’s a way through them, I suppose?” said the captain.
looking out and hailing the deck with news of all he saw.
lighter sprays fell upon her deck and wetted us like rain.
cold ending.”
only meant what he said, but would have done it; so high a place did the
which lay low and black upon the larboard. Sometimes the swell broke
Meanwhile such of the wounded as could move came clambering out of the

whole; and the thing was so distracting to my wits, that I was neither
bristled in the moon with rings and bubbles. Sometimes the whole tract


distance, which put me in mind of my perils and those of my friend.
me without that. So I set off eastward along the south coast, hoping to
little barren isle, and cut off on every side by the salt seas.
in safety. With that I set off, undaunted, across the top of the isle,

needful. There were, besides, some of the little shells that we call
All day it streamed rain; the island ran like a sop, there was no dry
little hut of a house like a pig’s hut, where fishers used to sleep when
I used to watch this smoke, when I was wet and cold, and had my head
sore throat, but a little comforted, perhaps, by having said good-night
strait; though what should bring any creature to Earraid, was more than
shining on a piece of turf. That made a fortune of three pounds and four
it had a flat top and overlooked the Sound) I was much in the habit of
I shouted out, and then fell on my knees on the rock and reached up my
have died upon my island.
The next day (which was the fourth of this horrible life of mine) I
slowly as I could, my heart beating so as to hurt me. And then it was
As soon as they were come within easy speech, they let down their sail
much as to say, “I told you I spoke English,” and began again as hard as
creek; and, sure enough, it was shrunk into a little trickle of water,
there, in pure folly. And even as it was, I had paid for it pretty dear,
like the isle I had just left; being all bog, and brier, and big stone.


duke.
was no sooner out of view of the house than I very jealously washed this
others, again, still wore the Highland philabeg, but by putting a few
on their dignity, asked alms only to buy snuff (by their account) and
guineas in my finger and thumb. Thereupon, the man of the house, who had
could ill afford to have so great a sum of money lying “locked up.” For
hours before I had him clear of the house, and then (as you shall hear)
Tell me what will bring it back? Is it more money you wish?”

carry.
five shillings he cried out so loud that I made up my mind I should say
of it there stands a bit of a small hill with a stone cocked upon the
by the better luck for me, he knew nothing, thought all was covered, and
as he, and if he did not strike across the hill due south I would even
genteel in the Highlands than it is with us, perhaps as partaking of
When I told him of my catechist, he shook his head, and said I was lucky
of that big and crooked Island of Mull, from Earraid to Torosay, fifty
Macleans, and the people that passed the ferry with me were almost all
But there was one melancholy part. In the mouth of Loch Aline we found
bulwarks, weeping and reaching out their hands to my fellow-passengers,
At Kinlochaline I got Neil Roy upon one side on the beach, and said I
I saw I had gone the wrong way to work, and without wasting time upon
he made haste to give me my route. This was to lie the night in
robber or a Jacobite agent, as perhaps Neil thought me.
walking very slowly with his toes turned out, sometimes reading in

other curiosities of the time and place. He seemed moderate; blaming
driven to it. James Stewart in Duror (that’s him they call James of the
shouldnae carry it. However, as I was saying, this Alan Breck is a bold,
them.--Ye’ll perhaps think I’ve been too long in the Hielands?” he
“Yes,” says he, “but the business has gone back and forth, as folk say.
They’re queer customers, the Appin Stewarts.”
he, “I will make bold to call that sweet singer of our covenanted
he burst rudely past me, dashed into the room, caught up a jar and
two things that men should never weary of, goodness and humility; we get

were high, rough and barren, very black and gloomy in the shadow of
prophetic in my bosom, although this was but the second time I had seen
oat-bread of Mr. Henderland’s and think upon my situation.
first was a great, red-headed gentleman, of an imperious and flushed

followers had halted about a stone-cast in the rear.
man.”
any other day but this, I would have set ye right and bidden ye God

no sooner done so than I began to scramble up the hill, crying out, “The


Indeed, I scarce knew what I was doing, but I obeyed; and as I did so, I


of my concern. Here was murder done upon the man Alan hated; here was
     * Part.
“No,” said I, “nor do I want to hear it.”
Balfour, that you and the man are very much alike.”
nor part, act nor thought in it.”

“And yet there was one thing I saw clearly,” said I; “and that was, that
shoes, and we in his (as might very well have been), I think we would be
Whereupon he gave me both of his, saying surely I had cast a spell upon
“Man, I whiles wonder at ye,” said Alan. “This is a Campbell that’s been
“Hoot!” said Alan, “the man’s a Whig, nae doubt; but I would never deny
 I was a little better inclined to go with him; for, indeed, I was
or we get clear! I tell ye this at the start, for it’s a life that I ken
minute. There was no cheering now, for I think they had other uses
such as I was now condemned to wander in with my companion. Partly as
would certainly have sent her to the bottom, had she not struck and
while; and presently she drew down and down, as if a hand was drawing
of the name that he is called.”
be the cause of it.”
company for a gentleman like me. If it hadnae been for that I would have

brand.
Gaelic.
Roy is dead, and be thankful for that!”
struggled together for the same gun and ran into each other with their
and we must have all things straight. We’re digging the bit guns and
now and again setting one alight and burning it to the bitter end; all
“Are you gone gyte?” * he cried. “Do you wish to hang your father?” and
very easy to the feet.
“This’ll no do,” said Alan.
hand upon the wall so that the house rang again.
     * Blame.

lad with a gift? Would ye change his clothes and then betray him?”
call it, set the hunt on him; and let honest, innocent folk show their
I thought it best to put a fair face on my consent, for I saw Alan
I stood abashed.

already of the murder. In the others, as well as I could make out
The first peep of morning, then, showed us this horrible place, and I

branch of the stream, and landed safe.
stumbling as I ran, I had a stitch that came near to overmaster me; and
hollow on the top and sloping one to the other, made a kind of dish or

of all I take a wrong road, and that in my own country of Appin; so that
(you that’s a man of so much penetration) that Alan Breck Stewart was

half-way. Higher up the glen, where the ground was more open, the chain
place. If they get up the sides of the hill, they could easy spy us with
rock, which was indeed like the position of that saint that was martyred
pike their bayonets among the heather, which sent a cold thrill into my
there spy out even in these memoirs.
temptation to resist, as well as pain to thole. For the sun being now
were now lying closer along the river-side, Alan proposed that we should
within cry of so many and scattered sentries. When we must pass an open

dark and cool; so that I walked without much fatigue, but in continual
night-march he beguiled the way with whistling of many tunes, warlike,
water running through the midst, and upon the one hand a shallow cave
We slept in the cave, making our bed of heather bushes which we cut for
had much distressed him; and I think besides, as I had sometimes
“before the red-coats think upon seeking Corrynakiegh; so now we must
a gift again, but I own I am laith to cut another.”
hands as lightly as I would trust another with my glove.”
“Well,” says Alan, “I wish he was a man of more penetration, for by my
he is a man of any penetration at all, which I misdoubt), ALAN WILL BE
might be wearied waiting on him.”
man would come still nearer; and so by the sound of whistling, he was
I thought Alan would be gravelled at that, for we lacked the means of

that James and some of his servants were already clapped in prison at
of an enemy’s gun to judge if it be truly aimed. Alan was advertised as

purse with four guineas in gold, and the best part of another in small
of him in the Highland manner (though he wore otherwise the Lowland
to honesty as being safer; at least, and all at once, he seemed to find


any other, it would be the best for both of us.”
too canny and Whiggish to be company for a gentleman like me; but there
mountains all round (you are to remember) from whence we might be spied
stuck a sprig of heath in the ground to serve instead; so that as soon
spread out in the shape of a fan and riding their horses to and fro in
it is a wild, desert mountain full of hills and hollows, and if we can
water was long out; and this posture of running on the hands and knees
soreness of my hands, and the smarting of my throat and eyes in the
about the middle of the waste.
I looked to see if he were jesting; but no, the little man was in dead
the night, the shapes of the hills like things asleep, and the fire
that I had any choice but just to obey as long as I was able, and die
I say Alan did as I did. Not that ever I looked at him, for I had enough
sun, and his eyes very light, but I was not afraid of him. I heard Alan
what I heard half wakened me.
to be filled with whirring grasshoppers; and I must open my eyes again
that, a sort of horror of despair sat on my mind, so that I could have

country as “Cluny’s Cage.” The trunks of several trees had been wattled
reports of his scouts, he moved from one to another as the soldiers
that as yet I dinna ken the name of.”
he, pouring out the brandy; “I see little company, and sit and twirl my
the Cage was arranged in a particular way, which none must disturb;
To be sure, there might have been a purpose in his questions; for
him, sometimes within a mile of where he lay; and when the least of the
I do not know if the collops were truly very good, but my heart rose
disgrace; it being held by my father neither the part of a Christian
it. I bear a king’s name,” says he, cocking his hat; “and I and any that
“Sir,” said I, “I am very wearied, as Alan says; and what’s more, as
I only heard voices, or men snoring, like the voice of a silly river;
begun by winning; for I remember sitting up, and seeing them hard at it,
He asked me for a loan of my money.
indeed, but seeing things of the right size and with their honest,
Now since the card question, everything I said or did had the power of

Alan said nothing, only looked on the ground.
“Yes,” said I, “if they lose, you give them back their money; and if
“It’s rather hard on me, too, Mr. Balfour,” said Cluny, “and ye give

Rannoch, whither we were led by one of the gillies from the Cage. This
each with a set countenance: I, angry and proud, and drawing what
And yet Alan had behaved like a child, and (what is worse) a treacherous

“Never,” says he; “but ye ken very well that ye’ve done worse. Are we to

“You asked me to speak,” said I. “Well, then, I will. You own yourself
and supped, and lay down to sleep, without another word.
that we should nowhere be so little troubled as in a country of the
never to be thought of. Our only food was drammach and a portion of cold
down my back in icy trickles; the mist enfolding us like as in a gloomy
would still be shocked) to see him cross himself in the manner of the
very open hill, so that we could not follow our usual plan and lie down

sound of it confused my ears. In this poor state I had to bear from
would be torture. So I went like a sick, silly, and bad-hearted
anger blaze, and be done with my life in a more sudden manner. He had

“I am a Stewart--” began Alan.

had taught me.
given the world to take back what I had said; but a word once spoken,

“that’s the way! Now lean upon me hard. Gude kens where there’s a house!

some fresh quarrel. I could have laughed, had not my stitch caught me so
IN BALQUHIDDER
trial in Edinburgh Castle; they were in ill-blood with Highlander and
the two or three friends that were let into the secret. He hid by day
before I left to all the people in Balquhidder and the adjacent parts;


“No, sir,” said I, a little alarmed; “nor yet of your father,
dog; my uncle, to be sure, had prated of some of our high connections,
and by a movement of his haunch, thrust clear the hilt of it, so that it


 says Alan, “I think I will have heard some sough* of the sort. Have ye
principal possession, and to set before his guests a mutton-ham and a
I’ll follow you.”
device in your warblers.”
Alan’s variations, which it seemed that he remembered perfectly.
itself, and nobly played; but it seems, besides, it was a piece peculiar
and the pipes changing hands; and the day had come pretty bright, and
for if we came not soon to Mr. Rankeillor’s, or if when we came there he
Strathire, a friend of Duncan’s, where we slept the twenty-first of the
sandy islet, overgrown with burdock, butterbur and the like low plants,
The bridge is close under the castle hill, an old, high, narrow bridge
the piers. At last there came by an old, hobbling woman with a crutch
a musket rattle on the stones. I must suppose the sentry had been
“Well?” said I.

one nor other, they might just as well not have been invented.”
“Man!” cried Alan, “if I make a boat, I’ll make a body to take it back

that we saw some third part of a mile in front. As we went, I kept
it would maybe get us that boat.”
“David Balfour,” said he, “ye’re a very funny gentleman by your way of
called for a tass of brandy with which he fed me in little sips,

“Ye neednae tell me,” she said at last--“ye’re gentry.”


us alone together. Alan in high good humour at the furthering of his
she touched me on the shoulder with a little friendly touch, as much as
“No,” said he, “ye’re not that kind. But I’ll tell ye what ye would do,
boat, we have but three shillings left in this wide world; and where
scruples with a portion of the truth.
as might be, and lie close in the bit wood on the sea-beach. “And ye can
done him by all sorts of persons, from the Lord President of the
affairs, not even her sweetheart, if she had one; but as soon as her


fairly built burgh, the houses of good stone, many slated; the town-hall
broke with me, it might come to the gallows yet for both of us. And as I
worn with these wanderings, and chanced to have stopped in front of

think it would be as well to tell you where and how in a more private
“I will even do as Horace says, sir,” I answered, smiling, “and carry



“and we are now at August the 24th. Here is a considerable hiatus, Mr.
“You are not to forget, sir,” said I, “that I have already suffered by
in my competence (to be touched upon hereafter) I was disposed to fear
to my pocket, and another blot upon your uncle’s character, which could
He passed me his word very seriously. “But,” said he, “these are rather

this part of ignorance, it was no matter of mine; so I smiled, said it
Latinity when your scholarship is riper; or in English if you please,


will be wondering, no doubt, about your father and your uncle? To be
“It sounds like a dream,” said I.
dolefully weak; took all this folly with a long countenance; and one
spoiled, and wanted nothing so much as to be tied up and soundly belted.


concerns before the public was a step from which I was naturally much

“You must be the judge, sir,” said I.

without them, that I give you my word I did not know my own clerk.” And
clear of the houses, and began to go along the side of the haven and
said, I have forgot my glasses!”
and sending me forward in the manner of a scout. I went up the hill,
Accordingly I cried and waved on Mr. Rankeillor, who came up alone and

wind in the south-west that covered the sound of our approach; and as we



digesting it, and then says he, “Weel, weel, what must be must,” and
and I’m bound to be prepared. And now that we understand each other,
confer upon the matter. And I may tell ye at the off-go, unless we can
Ye cannae desert your brother’s son for the fair shame of it; and if
where he pleased, and be damned to him!”

and I’m tryin to be as ceevil as it’s morally possible. As for that wild


I would have to ken, for instance, what ye gave Hoseason at the first
“Why, ye donnered auld runt, how else would I ken?” cried Alan.
lad in Caroliny, whilk would be as muckle mair, but no from my pocket,
whither we all followed, and set him down in a chair beside the hearth,
it George, perhaps?”

so many days and nights, and often with an empty belly, and in fear
these heads I unbosomed to Rankeillor the next morning, walking to and
If you interfere to balk his vengeance, you should remember there is
right. It is a poor thought that at my time of life I should be advising
“This,” says he, “is to my bankers, the British Linen Company, placing a
deal with the Advocate, be discreet; and in all these matters, may the
near the time of our parting; and remembrance of all the bygone days
Corstorphine bogs and over to the city and the castle on the hill, we
my view did I take one back glance at the friend I was leaving. But as
there was a cold gnawing in my inside like a remorse for something
now here is a volume that goes into the world and lacks your
volumes and those who read story papers belong to different worlds.  The
Moat House was heard ringing at an unaccustomed hour.  Far and near, in
Hard by the bridge, there was a stone cross upon a knoll, and here the
and a steel cross-bow at his back.  The express, it appeared, had brought
they die, my master?"
will have all things peaceably ordained.  And as for Sir Daniel, y are
"I know not," said Dick, colouring a little; for his guardian had changed
laggards the same gate.  Bowyer will give you jack and salet.  We must

and he continued obstinately digging, and piped up, very thin and shaky:
returned Bennet.  "There is a fight toward, it seems, and my lord stays a
"Ay! when the pinch comes, ye remember the old shoe," returned Nick.
over his shoulder; and then he put up his hand over his eyes, and stood
tongue among the meadows, and ended in a pair of goodly green elms, about


between the shoulder-blades, and pierced him clean through, and he fell
"I think shame to leave him lying," said Bennet, coming forward once more
"Master Dick," said Bennet, "come hither, and pull me a good pull upon
"Who hath done this, Bennet?" Richard asked, still holding the arrow in
"_Appulyaird fro Jon Amend-All_," read Shelton.  "What should this
Appleyards house was clean and bare.  There was a bed, with a blue
"Come, Hatch," said Dick, "respect his stone-blind eyes.  Would ye rob
gates.  Ay! there, if tales be true, he shall lack neither coal nor
said Dick.
their opinion; but rebellion travelleth ever downward from above; and
Sir Oliver: the man that ye have dispossessed and beaten is but the
somewhat timorously, to sally from the house and get to horse.
to arise and blot out the sinking sun.  They had passed three of the
"Who goes?  Stand! if ye be true!" shouted Bennet.  A man was seen
quarrel to the string; and now, when the others had desisted, he turned
The man stumbled and fell, and a great cheer arose from Hatch and the
"This writing was pinned to the church door," he said, handing it to the

    Sir Daniel, ye shull have the fourt;
"Now, well-a-day for charity and the Christian graces!" cried Sir Oliver,
"Sir Oliver," said Hatch, interrupting, "since it please you not to stop
the reinforcement was given to Master Shelton.  Indeed, there was no
shots; and go softly till y are past the wood.  If the rogues fall upon

ryght worchypful master, Sir Daniel Brackley, knyght, be thys delyvered
Sir Daniel and his men lay in and about Kettley that night, warmly
fireside, for it was cold at that hour among the fens of Kettley.  By his

And one of his retainers led up a poor, cringing old man, as pale as a
have hurt none."
of that loss.  Write me down twenty, and when I have recovered all I may,
even, with all my poor skill, do your good bidding."


beholden to your courtesy indeed."
"How!  Dickie Shelton!" cried the knight; and at the mention of Dicks
Selden, a link here at the door!"
eye painted on your jack, to be the better butt for archery; sirrah, ye
while that I read."
tongue; he babbles like a jack-sparrow.  Some day, when I may find the
"Prithee, Sir Daniel," he cried, "send one of the villains!  I beseech
Meanwhile, young Shelton was going on heartily enough with his breakfast,

credit."
the column, came the sorry reinforcement of the night before.  Sir Daniel
"Boy, then, dotard!" cried the knight.  "Could ye not see it was a wench?
"It is well said," replied Sir Daniel.  "Selden, fall me out with six
loud and steady; the windmill-sails were spinning; and the willows over
About a mile from Kettley, Dick came to one such break in the plain line
neighbourhood of help, the poor beast began to neigh most piercingly.  It
in the way.  "I would I had dared to tell him further," he thought; "for

how shall I do?  Prithee, good Master Richard, help me with your good

with your flight, it would go sore with me."

was the best wench in Europe, was this Joan of Arc.  Old Appleyard the
offence.  I meant but pleasantry.  And if I talk of women, it is because
dry-eyed!  But if ye know her, prithee, of what favour is she? fair or


"Why, now, what aileth thee?" said Dick.  "Methinks I help you very

Dick went to the door and opened it.  Within, upon a foul old russet

betters."
piping.  There was no sign of man in the labyrinth of waters.
"Look ye, then," pursued Hugh.  "Sith it shall so be, unsling me your
oars.
remembrance, and because ye had this toy with you thats not fit for
and leaped ashore; Dick, taking the horse by the bridle, sought to
"Tis Master Shelton, John," replied the ferryman.
were clear, his hand had closed on something firm and strong that

Dick turned, and came back to where his companion lay.
are more capable to care for me."
score men; he would sweep me these rascals as the wind sweeps leaves.
sudden chuckle, "I swear by the mass I believe Hugh Ferryman took you for
Jack? for knighted I shall be, or die for t.  Sir Richard Shelton,
for the road."  And he took a wallet from his girdle, wherein were bread
before him to announce his coming; and instead of pushing farther, he
returned across the wood for his companion.

spying far and wide.  The sun glistened upon his hair; with one hand he
A few yards further, the path came to the top of a ridge and began to go


invisible neighbour was just beyond the ruin.  And suddenly the colour
close by, in an attitude of listening, as though he had caught some sound
"O, they must need to walk in wood that may not walk in town," he

cometh of it?  Naught!  I were better to have bided in the cloister.
suppressed cheering arose close by among the hawthorns, and immediately
handful of archers are but now come to the ferry; murrey and blue is
you!--but your poor brother o the greenwood, that had never lands to
cold water, that discomfortable drink."


sentinel they saw posted in the fir, had shot an arrow at the

carcase on the hawthorn, remained alone to testify they had been there.
"To Holywood!" cried Dick, "when good fellows stand shot?  Not I!  I
But look ye, Jack, turn again with me.  Let me but warn these men, and,
ye, then, join party with Sir Daniel?  Have ye not ears?  Heard ye not
with and played among; and to leave them in the hour of peril--O, man, if



untrue companion.
rattled out of the dell, and came again into the more open quarters of
further side, until the last was gone.
"Nay, that is fools talk," said Dick, roughly.  "Y had no title to my
the eye followed it easily from point to point.  Here it was bordered by
cross-bows.  The long-bow, Jack, will have the uppermost ever."
when an arrow shone flying.  One of the men threw up his arms, his horse
whole troop there was but one fellow left, and he on foot; only, in

fellow-sinner in his torture.
then again twice.  It was repeated from another quarter.  The woods on

position--but instantly, out of a quarter of the wood surprisingly near

holding to his left.  Two minutes after, and the same obstacle arising,
Three minutes later, they were breasting through a low thicket of
dagger as he went.  The other, whether he was startled by the daring of

The noise of their passage had scarce begun to die away towards Shoreby,
confused rumour, came swelling on the wind; and it was plain that the
tree-tops overhead glowed golden; but the shadows had begun to grow
hand, and spared you!  Tis as brave to kill a kitten, as a man that not

"Say ye were in the wrong, then," he said, lamely.
man o wood, a coward, and a bully.  Nay, by the mass! the measure is

of the direction, intent solely on their quarrel.  But Dick had not gone
"A cross-bow!" said Matcham.  "Nay, boy, I have neither the strength to
to be faintly audible; but with every step they left it farther in the

together for the sake of warmth, their quarrel all forgotten.  And soon


about some hurried business.  See ye not how swift the beating draweth
Upon this path, stepping forth from the margin of the wood, a white
pity him!"
upon the lads.


and dragged their feet among the sand.
"What maketh he?" cried Matcham.  "What doth he want?  Who ever heard the


Dick heard the cry and turned.  He saw Matcham fall; and on the instant
pointing to Matcham, asked: "How call ye him, Dick?"

"this poor shrew begins a little to revive.  A little good canary will
me sorely to be safe between four walls.  Not since I backed a horse have
"How!" he cried, in a changed voice.  "Selden?  Speak!  What of Selden?"



his life, he will prove but a foul lord to both of us.  He may be brave
BOOK II--THE MOAT HOUSE

It was the terror of the Black Arrow that oppressed the spirits of the
been lacking grisly advertisements of what they might expect.

lifted him, he thought to wend.  But now, methinks, it is the soul that
gentleman, bestir you; for I have that matter on my conscience that shall
surety for the future.  Doubt not but he will lend a favourable ear.  A
are sly indeed, but not speedy.  Ye were a laggard ever."
depend.  Bring me a good answer back, and before three weeks, I will have
and jesteth in the very saying.  Nay, by Saint Barbary, he is a born

"I know not," he replied, doggedly.
last word to you."  And the wounded man turned upon the other side.
"Well," said Dick, "I will go call the priest to you as ye desired; for
of the Black Arrow and proscribed by the victorious Yorkists, was Dick,
"And yet his soul is sicker than his body," answered Dick.
"Ay, sir; and it were well if we all came fairly," answered Dick.
About an hour after, mass being somewhat hastily run through by Sir
with him when we arrived."

"An ye go not the wiser, ye will soon smell blood," replied Bennet.  "I
"Y have sent for me, Sir Daniel?" said young Shelton.
"It is well," said Sir Daniel; and then, rising into anger: "Gratitude

had not so turned upon suspicions.  And Sir Oliver here," he added, "why
a buffet in the mouth.  Till then ye have two courses: either swallow me



long table.
the priest, he shall clear himself, or I will know the reason why.  I do
"Alack, Sir Daniel!" he moaned, "y ave sworn a dread oath; y are
plainness, if that he continue to weary me, he shall go join his father.
"I have chosen," said the priest.  "Heaven pardon me, I will do evil for
souls cost, I must save him."
face, and signal with his mouth and eyebrows, like one who desired to
Dick remained rooted to the spot, his eyes wandering about the room, his
He continued staring at the eye.  The light shone upon it like a gem; it
man!  And this poor Matcham, too--to what a cockatrices nest have I not
voice--"they call it haunted."

Sir Daniels brow grew clearer.  He turned to Hatch.
although it was so high up, it was heavily barred.  The bed was
was the hall.  Certainly there was a secret passage in the hall; the eye
"Dick, Dick, it is I!"
But, Dick, are your eyes open?  Have they told you of to-morrows

hope."

murderer, for the trap-door was silently lowered to its place, and the
apartment, where the pair were, the darkness was complete.

for a little; then he spoke again.


followed by another; shouts ran along the battlements, shouts answered



whales back in the dim glimmer of the lamp.  Here and there were
"Here is no help," said Dick.  "Let us try back."
descend; the walls on either hand became damp and slimy to the touch; and
trap.  Here is no issue; and, by my sooth, good Jack, we are here as
"I am an orphan, like yourself, of father and mother," said Joanna; "and
Dick--dear Dick!"
turned towards you in mine own despite; and now, if we can in any way
Dick reconnoitred his position.  The sudden turn gave him a post of
body, I do rejoice to see ye profit of my lessons!  And now, what make

the passage.

It was just at the delicate moment of the operations that she spoke.
"By the mass, then, we are all shent!" he shouted, stamping with his

was too far below, the light reached him not, and they looked in vain.
had so far indicated his position to the men along the battlements.
level than he took to his heels and ran straight before him in the dark,
to account.  It was more probable he would make haste to marry her to
against a tree.

notice of the men of the Black Arrow, stuck from the bosom of his

scalp that must a cost him many a good ounce of blood."
So Greensheve returned to his ambush on the wayside, and Lawless trudged


right of his good company of archers, coolly taking rents, and giving

the death."
shadows at morning; Sir Daniel shall look east and west, and see none


following upon the events already recorded, as if the House of Lancaster
lusty, weather-beaten fellows, hard of hand, bold of eye; and though they
"Tis for Master Shelton there," said another, nodding his head towards
follow with me.  Capper, lead forward.  We will follow him this time, an

Dick and his two outlaws drew a little closer to the object of their
"Is it you, my lord?" cried Sir Daniel.

even Sir Daniel affected, in public, to condemn.
bearers steadily patrolled the garden.

forward once more with greater resolution and assurance.  The path led
returned with all despatch to bring it.  The ladder was very short, but

in my head, every man-Jack of them weareth me a white badge in his
down his hand, and, first one and then the other, pulled them up.

like a silent watch word, these gesticulations made the round of the

the spacing of their sentries--and, taken where they are, lying so
that Joanna should remain under the guardianship of Sir Daniel rather
himself, and entrusted the larger to the leadership of Greensheve.
Daniels movements in the town of Shoreby had from the first been irksome
in a line, about twenty yards from the garden wall, and took position
darkness.
which he brandished like a switch.  Against this opponent, with his reach
pursuer.  Here there was no great difference in size, and though the man,
caught a blow upon his bill, and leaped right at the throat of his
night; over the hoarse roar of the breakers steel clanged upon steel, and
"Lay down your arms, men!" cried the stranger knight.  "I have yielded
ill with me if he were."
house--unless they be all dead or deaf--have heard our hammering this
not misplaced.  I will meet you at the point of day at St. Brides Cross.
stripped to the skin, and four fellows were already wading seaward to

wait.  Down the road from Holywood a gentleman in very rich and bright
"Are ye here alone, young man?" inquired the other.
well as all the profit, of that little blind-mans mellay on the beach."
"Men call me the Lord Foxham," added the other.
take place upon these steps, hear me to a full end, and judge me with
peace; a youth of excellent disposition and brave bearing.  For your

CHAPTER IV--THE GOOD HOPE
him and the Lord Foxham, to make one bold stroke that evening, and, by
"Lawless!" he cried, "you that were a shipman, can ye steal me a ship?"

the harbour mouth, where it heaved regularly and smoothly on the entering
"They call her the Good Hope, of Dartmouth," replied the loiterer.  "Her


sooth.  Man Tom, how say ye to that?  Gossip, ye speak well, though I can
let him drink a draw-well, he will never be quenched."
of sinking.
captains piety, there were many lockfast chests and cupboards, which

was depressingly affected by the bleak disorder of the sky and the

outside; others had pushed more boldly in, and, choosing places as near
"Hey?" cried the skipper, tipsily, "who are ye, hey?"
another, and a good gag in his mouth, he had been tumbled neck and crop
sea, and could play the part of mariners.  With the aid of these, a slice
Many of the men lay holding on and praying aloud; many more were sick,

and this impulse of rabblement was not restrained without a certain
the pier, he and Lord Foxham were taken in a posture of very poor
steel; nor had there been the least signal of advantage, when in the
both.  At last, and whether by design or accident, the bows of the Good
begun to understand somewhat more clearly, or perhaps another ear had
"What!" bawled one of the grumblers, "he carrieth us to seaward!"

like a great black bulwark, hove immediately in front of her; and, with a
sea, that the peril was by no means over.
that was a good shipman.  None but the honest and the bold can endure me
night, I shall owe a tall candle to our Lady."
to port with, it is I--a renegade friar, a thief, and all the rest ont.
the smoking waves, and toss her stem and stern alternately high in air
CHAPTER VI--THE GOOD HOPE (concluded)
there be one by me who, at least, is gentle born; for after having lived
"Ha!" said the baron, gloomily, "thus shall every terror attend upon the
damsel.  Will he obey?  I know not."
prepareth a sufficient force to fall upon and scatter them.  I have made

the precious papers in his bosom, bade him be of good cheer, and left him
"Ay," said Lawless, "unless we get first to the bottom."
with a horrid pang to the immediate proximity of death.
"Now, boys," cried Lawless, "the saints have had a care of us, indeed.
hath somewhat ebbed, we may walk ashore upon our feet."
But they had not moved far in the direction of the hillock, before the
range at pleasure, robbing and slaughtering and burning.  It is the pity

he saw them wind away and disappear in the thick curtain of the falling
falling, without pause or variation, in one even, blinding cloud; the
of a man who is neither a gentleman by birth nor so much as a good
dug out his forest hiding-place.  The roots served him for rafters, the

"Tis a warm corner, to be sure," replied Dick, "and a pleasant, and a
last while, and y are like to lose the maid--do I take it aright?"

And then, when Dick had clothed himself in this clerical disguise,
that I lack, I have a long tongue and a voice like the monastery bell--I
broke--not to say backs--ere you and I win sound from where were going

Daniel.  That was the knights own letter to Lord Wensleydale, sent by

been a shipman, ye had infallibly gone down in the Good Hope; an I had
daggers, stuck beside them in the board, and the black and menacing looks
him not, my father; but come, drink of my cup, and give me a
now adventure my poor carcase where ye please."

On the afternoon following the wreck of the Good Hope, the buttery, the
Two monks--a young and an old--had arrived late, and were now warming
entering by the main gate and crossing the court in an oblique direction.
burned by every door.  And where the door stood open, Dick could look in

succeeded by surprise, and surprise by suspicion.  Dick, who could read
war upon fair maids, and I hereby entreat them to copy me so far, and to
But here the young lady clapped her hand suddenly upon Dicks mouth,
I was a maid, he had taen his belt to me, forsooth!"

"Joanna," said Dick; and then his voice failed him.  "Joanna," he began
"Is it decided, then?" asked the lad.
there, I would straight through it; if the way were full of lions, I
So they ran on, holding each other by both hands, exchanging smiles and
"Come, then," said the lady, "it is permitted you."

He had not been long in this position, when he was somewhat strangely
it in the wallet at his belt.
song:
the other hand, he dared to address the drunken outlaw, the spy might
But Lawless only laughed and staggered, and tried to clap young Shelton

instantly broke the wax and read the contents of the letter.  It was
of intelligence, suddenly drew a black arrow from below his robe, and
where, if ye continue to abide, ye will not only hang yourself, but me

At the sound of their cries, guests, men-at-arms, ladies, servants, and,
"Ay, gossip, truly?" asked Sir Daniel, keenly.  "And what came he
like an old oak, by the woodman; to-morrow or next day, by will come the
Sentinels were posted close around the house and garden; a sentinel on

well; and for the marriage, it should be prevented."
matters little; there is no help for my hard case, and I must still be


The door was then opened; one of the men took Dick by either arm, another
lay, his limbs piously composed, upon a bier.
added, turning to young Shelton.  "In all civility, who are ye? and at
the party gone safe home; and if all goeth well, and ye have planned no
they had done so by Sir Olivers command.  Here, then, he was trapped.
cessation, now with the singing of psalms, now with a note or two upon

since needs must; but I will not be burthened with your company."


Instantly Sir Oliver arose from his place, and, gliding behind the
"For sure," replied the outlaw.  "He came last night, and belted me sore
"Friend Lawless, sit ye still," he said.  "An ye have eyes, look yonder
"Nay, that indeed!" chimed Lawless.  "And a fig for death, at worst!  It
The bells in the tower began to break forth into a doubling peal, and a
These, as they drew near the door of the sacred building, filed off on

chamber where the ringers were leaping on their ropes, and they also
narrowness of the stalls and the crowding of terrified priests and
shall rue this hour!"

There was a murmur of approval among the bystanders, so boldly Dick
"Search them," he said, "for arms.  We may so judge of their intentions."
me prisoner, and that blithely, foregoing the advantage of this holy
vehemence doth somewhat tell against yourself."
house, whither was he to turn--he, helpless and penniless?  Or if he be


and the mounted messengers that kept arriving and departing, announced
your own and for your fathers sake; and knowing you guiltless of this
utterly had his long life of hardship and adventure blunted the sense of
a man is slain that very evening--"
and knew not how to answer it," said Dick; "but having answered once, I
appears ye have been hardly dealt with, and have much excuse.  But look
"An it pleased you, then," said Dick, "to cast your eye upon this letter,
York or Lancaster, true man or thief, I do now set you at freedom.  Go, a


"How if we lay there until the night fall?" Dick proposed.
for more distant parts; answerably to this, the rude alehouses along the
closed the door behind him.  All three were unsteady upon their feet, as
of the Good Hope; so careless, in those days, were men who wore arms of
you both o Thursday morning; and now here I be, o Saturday night,
man be dumb, so be as hes courteous, he will still speak when he was
It was not so much the danger, it was not so much the annoyance, that now
him; nothing but Lord Foxhams signet, which they plucked savagely from


if ye be shrewd fellows, as I trow ye are, ye can see plainly where your

"Nay, if ye get again to drinking, all is lost!" cried Tom.

rude alehouse where Lawless had taken Arblaster on the day of the gale.
go pledge he will forgive you."
faces, and their mouths gaped like codfish at a fishmongers.
sack or two of gold coin to my share, I should be a fool indeed to
beyond the captains wallet."
the extreme finger-ends, at the arms-length, and over against the

was partly comical and partly terrifying to the fugitive whom they were
one dead body remained behind upon the snow.

CHAPTER I--THE SHRILL TRUMPET

dexterous was this one, so desperately did he charge and scatter his
Four against one, the steel flashed about him in the starlight; the
muffled rushing in the snow; and in a good hour for Dick, who saw the
displayed such strength, skill and energy, a lad no older than

"By the mass!" replied the other, "it is well for you."
summon you next, be readier to attend."
whole party moved slowly away and disappeared in twenty different
In the bottom of his heart Dick already entertained a great terror and
that was here at watch two hours before the day.  But this is the first
men enough, I would fall on even at this present.  For, look ye, at the
"My lord," said Dick, "when ye hanged these five poor rogues ye did
place upon the steps, and despatched messenger after messenger to hasten
There was but one danger, but that was imminent and great--Gloucesters

sword and giving rein, the whole troop of chargers broke into the gallop
halfway to the nearest house before the bells began to ring backward from
The beating of the bells, the terrifying summons of men who ran about the
bye-street.  Only the last score of riders drew rein and faced about in
The five streets being each secured by a good guard, the reserve would
"Go," he said, "win your spurs.  Win glory for me: one Richard for
the market-place of the town, the main issue of the battle would probably
Meanwhile the utmost uproar and confusion had continued to prevail
barricade, and sounded like blows upon the walls of the two flanking

assailants, wielding their falchions with one hand, strove with the other

higher, and a more effectual rampart of fallen men and disembowelled
Gloucester was already riding down their rear; in the inside of a minute
Richard Shelton," he added, "ye have pleased me.  Kneel."

with dismay about the future.  This young dukes was indeed a gallant
arrows.
Dick turned to the man who was at his elbow, a little insignificant

first front of battle, still the last to sleep.  He will go far, will
seemed rather to await a further signal.
post.

and triumphant voices.  And at the same time the men in front of him
giving a foretaste of that furious valour and skill to cut his way across

stiff and sore, so bruised and cut and broken, and, above all, so utterly
and promising them a rich reward and a special recommendation to the
great house had been carried by assault.  The gates hung in splinters
Dick, almost without thinking, trod out the incipient conflagration, and
Thereupon the full wrath of the young leader burst from his control.  He
yard gate he rode forth by the garden."

"My father," answered Dick, "I am here upon an errand of expedition.
day exceeding bright, the snow dazzling.  And as Dick looked around him,
port, and from the cover of the shoreside taverns.  In that quarter,



and with a dog whimpering and jumping at his heels.
excuse or favour.  For, bethink ye, in this realm of England, that is so
"Mine is the loss," said Dick.
In the meanwhile, Dick turned to the old shipman, who had seemed equally
a beggar; and for my man Tom, a knave fellow in russet shot him down.
life; and how a thing once done is not to be changed or remedied, by any
"Upon your name," answered Catesby.  "It is my lords chief superstition.
Thereupon Dick put himself at the head of his men, and giving the word of

pretty closely scattered, each pierced by an arrow.  And here Dick spied
upon his saddlebow, and once more pushed toward the forest.
open snow, and compassed about with enemies.  Whether ye will or not, I

when he reached the borders of the wood.
"Sir Richard," replied the man-at-arms, "I would follow the line until

led into the very depths of the forest, suddenly split, like a bursting
with them; they could no longer spank forth briskly on a path beaten firm
passing about the flask; and Dick, having collected the most delicate of


"Do ye hold me so guilty?" he said; "you that defended me--you that are
"Madam," said the miserable Dick, "I do partly see mine error.  I have
It appeared to Dick, in this extremity of his humiliation and repentance,
And then, to the extreme surprise of Dick, she first very tenderly wiped


"Nay, madam, exceedingly fair," said the distressed knight, pitifully
"I do, madam," said Dick.  "Although, upon my heart, I do hold me but
"In honour, I do," said Dick.

The horses had by this time finished the small store of provender, and
he must no longer squander valuable hours.  The direct way to the uplands
within a short half mile of where Dick had seen the glimmer of the fire,

opponents.  He himself, placing Alicia in the shelter of a bulky oak,
"Well," thought he to himself, "even if I lose my horses, let me get my

"Here, Dick!" she cried, as she clasped his hand in hers.
"Rally, rally!" cried Dick.  "Rally upon me!  Rally for your lives!"
eager boy.  And here was the young knight, his sweetheart, indeed,
the vanquished led the pursuers into wildly divergent paths.  Hence, in
joy.
"Ay, dear, ye are my lady now," he answered, fondly; "or ye shall, ere
"Dick!" mimicked Alicia.  "Dick, indeed!  Ay, fair sir, and ye desert
kiss me, either one of you, for luck and kindness; and then kiss each
been sore mauled and beaten, one way and another, these last days, and my

the gold rood upon the topmost summit glittered brightly in the moon.
battle and stamped out his foes in that district, was already on the
"My lord duke," replied Dick, stoutly enough, but with a qualm at heart,
"It is well," replied Richard, adding, "Shelton, ye may go."

himself on one knee before the duke.
himself to the best advantage with the aid of the Lord Foxhams baggage,
As he thus strolled and pondered, the solemn light of the morning grew
"Well, Dickon," said Sir Daniel, "how is it to be?  Do ye make war upon

"I care no more," returned Richard.  "I let you go east, west, or south;

shall repent you that ye were so harsh."

steps behind him, and, still with uncovered head, he waited until that
prevail I wot not.  But if ye have so long pursued revenge, and find it

"Ye are fair," he said at last, "and, as they tell me, dowered.  How if I
choice of my favour, chose but the grace of an old, drunken shipman.  I
Lord Foxham.  "He hath well served the cause."
officers.
were already winding forward up the road; already the Duke of

{1}  At the date of this story, Richard Crookback could not have been
******* This file should be named 848.txt or 848.zip *******
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to

Bohemia gained the affection of all classes by the seduction of his
him a singular facility in disguise; he could adapt not only his face and
which, for one of his urbanity, formed the most impenetrable disguise.
Sometimes his offer was laughingly accepted; sometimes it was firmly, or
mockery.”
The young man seemed to reflect.
“It is delicious,” said he.
On leaving the third saloon the young man counted his store.  There were

surprising inflections, which seemed to be independent of his will.  The

eligible human tenement which I still occupy and a fortune of three
who respects himself fall in love on four hundred pounds?  I concluded,
auditors were led to imagine that his love affair was nearer his heart
that, although we are not entirely in the same case, I am going to put an
The young man tried to catch his arm, but as the table was between them

itself.”

penniless trio,” he cried, “should go arm in arm into the halls of Pluto,

different places; and hence railways were invented.  Railways separated
That is, to some extent, my own experience.  I cannot put a pistol to my
palatable.”
“Your Highness,” said the Colonel, turning pale; “let me ask you to
summoned the young man of the cream tarts, and issued his directions to
“It is still time, Mr. Godall, to make good your escape into thraldom.
into the court, entered a doorway and disappeared.
other’s face.
“Follow me,” was the reply.  “The President will see you in the cabinet.

“That is what I have come to see,” replied the Prince.  “If they keep
told you wish to speak with me.”
behind these doors, and we insist on joining it.”
are either going to oblige me in the little matter of which you are
“I believe in you,” he said to Florizel, as soon as they were alone; “but

should turn you off.  But I know the world; and this much any way, that
but not without a shudder; the Colonel followed his example with an air
“Middling,” said the President.  “By the way,” he added, “if you have any
with little promise of strength or the quality that makes success.  Few
no more than skin and bone, was partly paralysed, and wore spectacles of
commencing with the mighty dead.
an ape.”
business, to present him to the gentleman on the divan.
suspect a mystification.

“And he also,” asked the Colonel, “is a permanency—like yourself, if I
“You astound me,” said the Colonel.  “Was that unfortunate gentleman one
If my enfeebled health could support the excitement more often, you may

friend I mean—may any of us be pitched upon this evening as the slayer of

without some hurry, into the adjoining room.  It was similar in every
And he proceeded to equip himself with a second pair of spectacles.
any stake, however serious.”
hesitated; and sometimes you would see a player’s fingers stumble more
The players held their respiration, and only breathed by gasps.  The
air their horror of what they had witnessed was redoubled.
“I receive your Highness’s commands,” replied the Colonel.  “Shall we go
Square, fracturing his skull and breaking a leg and an arm.  Death was

the repetition of the hazard.”
“Will your Highness take my life?” he cried.  “It is his—his freely; but

Highness’s superior bearing.  He acknowledged them almost with humility.
“How bitterly I wish,” he cried, “that I had never brought you to this
“Attention, gentlemen!” said the President, and he began to deal.
face.  There were exactly fifty chances out of a hundred that he was
in his ear:—
The Prince endeavoured in vain to articulate something in response, but
what are my directions?”
which sounded unpleasantly in his own ears.  He conceived a reluctance to

“He was pinioned as he left the club,” replied the Colonel, “and now
justice should be dealt.  Our oath forbids us all recourse to law; and
The Colonel kissed his hand with the greatest affection; and at that
offer of assistance; but I have instead a piece of diversion to propose
the supervision of Mr. Geraldine, and a pair of faithful and adroit

The next room to his was inhabited by a lady, very attractive in her air
throwing out insinuations of a very glorious order when he was safely
and was not restrained by delicacy from indulging them in many rather
obscured in an odd manner on the other side, and still more abashed when
and round during the whole colloquy, which was carried on in whispers.
lamenting over this misfortune, which he attributed to the Britisher’s
of more than his own share of manhood.  He felt ready to face the devil,

other, and threading his way through the assembly, approached the table

“I believe the question is now one between my brother and myself,”
corner under the gallery, where his ear was immediately struck with the
This put Silas in mind of his billet.
stream of people which was now moving in a contrary direction.  Perhaps
spirit began to rise; he peered round the corner and saw no one at the
woman has once so far forgotten herself as to make the first advance, she
watched by jealous eyes.  Let me see,” she added; “I am older than you,
“To-morrow night, then,” she continued, with an encouraging smile, “you
“I cannot see the use of all these instructions,” said Silas.

you refuse me such trifles at our first interview?”
importance; he was now sure she was a countess; and when evening came he
bed-clothes came to offer him a light.
“Him it is I mean.  Who else should it be, when I had your orders to
the seventh landing and stood in front of his own door.  There he waited
He lowered his hand, but what it touched was not simply a counterpane—it
round and looked for what he feared to see.  Sure enough, there was the
night-cap, carrying a lamp which lighted up his long white countenance,
pulse, for that is often a just reporter of the heart.”
you think this piece of dead flesh on your pillow can alter in any degree

the gangs of Europe, might have identified him, and gained new weapons
the guilty person.  And remember that we only know a portion of the plot;
investigated with the bistoury.  When blood is once cold and stagnant, it
Yes, and the name cut off the shirt.  Their work has been done thoroughly
bowie-knife, I cannot bring myself to decide.  But one thing I see
whole into the empty box.  With an effort on the part of both, the lid
own former indiscretions were now returned upon him in kind; for the
fortune, a good while ago, to do Colonel Geraldine, his Master of the
and Colonel Geraldine; I even overheard some of their conversation the
The Doctor seemed painfully impressed.

generously you offered to shield me, even before I had convinced you of
offer them; and trouble me with no more words of gratitude, for I value
themselves about the unusual weight of the Prince’s baggage.  Silas
exquisite condescension in these words:—“I was charmed, young sir, to be

and expressed himself pleased to have been of any service to a friend of
for he looked startled and begged a repetition of the order.  It was with
was horrified to find a score of loiterers looking on.  But he knocked
entertainment in the immediate neighbourhood.
when he was recalled to a sense of his peril by the action of the boots,
will touch your lordship’s money.  I’m as safe as the bank,” he added;


treasure, he had not the courage to refuse, and was shown downstairs to
There, all night long, a prey to the most terrible imaginations, he
removed his arm and opened his eyes, and Silas found himself once more

attract the notice of the occupant; and Silas stood waiting, in an agony
to the Prince the whole history of his calamity.
yourself, Mr. Scuddamore,” and then, seeing that Silas still hesitated,
thus perished at the hands of violent and treacherous men.  Poor

“Even so,” returned the Prince.  “This letter, which the disposition of
                                * * * * *
the lesser Indian hill wars.  He it was who took the chieftain prisoner
shook hands with a few old comrades, and received their warm

he at once raised his cane in answer, and had soon ensconced himself in
there was something business-like in the speed which convinced him of the
a house where a reception was being held; but he did not doubt it was the

“Oh, no,” replied the cabman.  “Mr. Morris is the person of the house.”

announcing “Lieutenant Brackenbury Rich,” ushered him into the
cabman was a tout.”
tone; “and believe me I am gratified to make your acquaintance.  Your
He partook of some champagne, which he found excellent; and observing
mask, a haggard, careworn, and preoccupied spirit.  The fellows around
him from the principal apartment.  Peering through the division, he saw
suffice—Under whose roof do you suppose yourself to be?”
misunderstanding which has procured me the pleasure of your company for
away, and the company preserved its number undiminished.  But towards the
sooner passed the threshold of the ante-chamber than he was brought to a
highest regions of the house.  It was as he had expected.  He ran from
Lieutenant and his host, there were not more than five persons in the
be any one present who has heard enough, if there be one among the party

Mr. Morris conducted the deserters as far as the door, which he closed
volunteers, and every trooper in the ranks replied to my appeal.  But a
service than to make him acquainted with the other.”
of our friends, and one of them my own born brother, have perished in the
                                                               T. GODALL.”
even the most serious concerns,” added the Colonel, “have a merry side.”
address in question.
approaching trial.
the listeners on the other side.
plainly to the dilapidation of the house.
before him into a small apartment, lighted by a smoky lamp and the glow
exquisite affability, “that I could offer you a more cheerful programme;
And he gazed with the deepest interest on the features of the celebrated
nor was he less sensible to the charm of his conversation or the
Dr. Noel extinguished the lamp.  A faint, grey light, premonitory of the
cautious tread approaching up the kitchen stair.  At every second step
for his mouth was open like that of a hound about to leap.  The man had
unaccustomed sternness on the Prince’s features.  It was no longer
The President made no answer either by word or sign; but continued to
so often on the wings of chance, and skill and courage may fall by the
“I mean so far to honour you,” replied the Prince.
gentlemen, that it will not be long a-playing.”
“Colonel Geraldine and Doctor Noel,” he said, “will have the goodness to

“God,” cried the Colonel, “God defend the right!”
added, “see how strangely we men are made! my revenge is not yet five

his condescending friendship adds a charm to their private life_.  _To
STORY OF THE BANDBOX
exteriors that can well be fancied.  Blond and pink, with dove’s eyes and
well-born, who was willing to call the diamond hers even at the price of
Lady had another lady’s maid.
Immediately after he had been outraged by the military foot, he hurried

life was little short of heavenly.  He was always dressed with uncommon
lame of one foot.  The private secretary, to whose entrance they paid no
“Upon my word, Clara,” said Pendragon, “I believe you are the most
that the second part of it?  Indeed, you are the best of brothers, and I
they were alone, “I have a commission for you this morning.  But you

immediately to this address,” and she gave him a paper, “but do not, on

deceive me in my present state of temper.  You certainly spoke about an
he detested the husband!
tailor’s.
Anxious to be rid of his incubus, he walked somewhat faster than his
“Indeed, Sir Thomas,” returned Harry, “I am not accustomed to be

the other members of her family.”
Charlie saw that he had committed an unpardonable blunder, which he
but the latter, lame foot and all, evaded the blow with his umbrella, ran
was deeply shocking to Harry.  He desired to forget the sight; he

suspicions, and blamed himself roundly for having so much as entertained
knocked with more than usual discretion, and was more than usually
can tell you, and you do not look as though you would eat a girl.  But be
kind!”

Harry made but one bolt of it into the house, driving the maid before


name, what have I to look for but death?”

shoulder, he beheld Charlie Pendragon waving him with both arms to

encouragement.

He came to himself a moment afterwards, seated in a border of small
either for defence or flight.
wall and break my _Gloire de Dijons_!  What is your name?” he added,
to have a bit of talk with you before I march you to the station.”
coat, I take it, has never seen the inside of Rag-fair, and then your
admired on Lady Vandeleur; there were rings and brooches, ear-drops and
but the rustle of the leaves and the hurried pulsation of his heart.  It
upon his knees, hastily drew together the scattered jewels and returned
“Here is a fine afternoon, Mr. Rolles,” said he: “a fine afternoon, as

“I wish you a pleasant saunter, sir,” said he.
contamination of vile and brutal natures.  He felt he could lay his life
Hartley, may I ask?  I am not the man to stick upon a brooch.”


street and up another for the space of perhaps a minute and a half.
almost immediately after a servant came running from the house and
fear.  And see, I will pick up your hat.  Why, love of mercy!” she
with many cries, but the latter was too fleet of foot, and probably too
for the boudoir.  When he opened the door an astonishing and even

might have robbed me of my mother’s coronet and ring; and Nature might
sufficiently exhibited your valuable qualities in this house; we are now
do not pick oakum from now until your dying day.”
aunt in Worcestershire_.  _With this he married Prudence_, _and set sail
folio, it was said—on the authority of the Fathers of the Church.  These
secretary, ragged and bleeding, in the company of his landlord; when he

clergyman whistled softly to himself as he stooped to examine the ground.
prodigious magnitude and of the finest water.  It was of the bigness of a
hindrance.  And as he suddenly turned it, the rays leaped forth again
the Secretary.  As for Mr. Rolles, he showed himself in a most obliging
“The more it is worth,” remarked Simon shrewdly, “the more difficult it
usual; the materials for his great work had never presented so little
experience in life.  In the reading-room he saw many of the country
“Sir,” said he, “you will excuse my abruptness; but I judge you from your
“You put me in a difficulty,” said the stranger.  “I confess I have no
“You have already more than repaid me,” returned the other.
these subjects, he was totally lacking in educational method.  For the
the Rajah’s Diamond.  That done, he might return to pursue his researches
“I have heard of the Prince,” replied Mr. Rolles; “and General Vandeleur
“But how shall I know them?” inquired the clergyman.
expression arrogant and predatory; his whole appearance that of a swift,

shouts and pantomime of his companion; and if ever, as must frequently
men is to set a price on Virtue’s head; and if the Rajah of Kashgar—a


compartment, and only one old gentleman in the other end.”
night, he could do no less than receive it; he had no means of
most internal pocket of a system of great-coats, and devoutly recommended
recovered his self-command; and even after he had resumed a recumbent
While he was thus lying, a strange incident took place.
threatened; if Mr. Rolles was afraid of him, it appeared that he, in his

He stood riveted to the spot, following this unusual business with his
Mr. Rolles was hugely relieved.  The Dictator was as deeply in the affair



“It is very simple,” replied the clergyman; “it proceeds from my great
special knowledge and obviously great experience the negotiation of the
accomplishments than you imagine; and though I have encountered a number
the reader for the conclusion of Mr. Rolles’ adventures to the next
Saturday afternoon, an occasional dinner with members of his family, and
firm, a man of much austerity of manner, made him gravely welcome,
“The conditions,” said the Writer to the Signet, “are, as I have twice
unburdened.”
Paris, I should not hesitate an instant.”
confess the difficulty had not occurred to me, and I failed to inquire;
business.”
lawyer.
once his mind was fairly made up, he walked with a new feeling of
to improvement in the French tongue; for this purpose he had a master

recognising the folly of continued search, he started on a walk to
expected, the conversation was conducted in the English language.
“I am beginning to learn the world,” replied the other, “and I see that
Hebrew?  There is an end to all things, and you have come to the end of
retained his presence of mind, and suffered not a moment to elapse before
Francis looked about him; the neighbourhood was very lonely, the house
From the window of his new apartment Francis Scrymgeour commanded a
people.
velvet with a skull-cap to match, issue from under the verandah and
the house.
in their turn were rolled up by a similar contrivance; and for the space
this the case that he was seized with a sudden horror when he reflected
“Is Mademoiselle his daughter?” inquired Francis.
or what?”
seat which had been taken for him was only two or three numbers from the
towards a close, when the door opened and two persons entered and
to overhear what passed between the Vandeleurs?  What would he not have
Should he take the flower from his button-hole and throw it into the box?
and he moved on again with mechanical footsteps, and suffered the crowd
like an ornament.  It seemed to Francis, as he slipped into a doorway,
I do not know even what to feel, nor who are my friends and enemies.”


“Look!” he cried to the young man, “what fine cattle! what an elegant
cigar.  The General, a red, military-looking man, offered some traces of
violent exclamations.

discoveries; all might be well, or all might be ill; he was sure, at
modulation and the changes of his voice it was obvious that he told many
merrily; there was a perpetual babble of voices and sound of knives and
“The coffee is my province,” Francis heard him say.
It would be impossible to depict the confusion and distress of Francis
vivacity and volume; but still no sign of any alarming or even notable
Francis heard Miss Vandeleur break forth into a passion of tears.

and casting open the shutters he closed his eyes and threw himself with
as fast as an eye can wink the thing was done; the young man had not the

You are no son of mine.  You are my brother’s bastard by a fishwife, if

The tones of the old man’s voice were, if possible, more wounding than
examined his face for an instant.
By this time they had reached the garden gate; and Miss Vandeleur, having
“Then,” said Francis, “give me a keepsake.”
Whatever you hear,” she continued, “whatever happens, do not return to
replaced.

him on the other line of street.  The plan was ill-devised: as a matter
wideawake, and had the disorder of his toilet summarily repaired.  The


Francis sat staring into the open casket without movement, without
you please, to throw off your bewildered air, and act as though I were





of Bohemia.”
inspired you, and you will live to be grateful for the misfortunes of
degree of comfort until I have had time to arrange your situation.  You
driver some distance lower, he was knocking at Mr. Vandeleur’s garden
in the other the Prince recognised the young man who had consulted him on
walk.  Mr. Rolles,” he added with severity, “let me remind you that I
listen; and I have to ask you to hear me with respect, and to obey
friend.  Believe me, had I known he was thus honoured, I should have
you good evening.  I judge,” he added to Vandeleur, “that your silence
intrusion.
THE HOUSE WITH THE GREEN BLINDS.  _One more adventure_, he adds, _and we
“I have made ruin of my life,” he said at last.  “Help me; tell me what I
in your penitence, young as it is.”
take some sweeping and courageous measure and put it out of the reach of
green court set with the most costly flowers, and a stork, the only one

an obligation that your Highness lays on the authorities.”

as if he were to be the last victim to its influence.

“Your Highness returns good for evil,” said he.  “To an act of
myself to the grace of God.  It is thus, thanks to that modest and

executed a brother-officer who had the misfortune to displease the Rajah
murder, he drugs the young priest and seizes the prey.  And now, by an
hell-fire.  I have told you but a hundredth part of its story; what
ruined man.”
to the diamond; and their vast diving operations on the River Seine are

had met at college; and though there was not much liking between us, nor
and as it had been built of a soft stone, liable to consume in the eager
morning, we met on our usual terms; but I judged it more delicate to
without the fear of interruption; and hence, being in another part of the
wind; in front, a few tumbled sand-hills stood between it and the sea.

The Sea-Wood of Graden had been planted to shelter the cultivated fields
hermits.
faculties, and no sense of drowsiness or fatigue.  I rose and sat by the
I watched it for some seconds in great surprise.  When I had arrived in
I should have one more night in comfort.  In the morning, I might either
began to prick me sharply.  It was a pity to let the opportunity go by
on the lower storey, but none of them had been tampered with; I tried the
to the north-east.  Then I threw up the window and climbed in.

there was no change in the pavilion, and not a human creature was seen
and the surf rolled heavier with the rising tide.  I was down at my
and, as she passed within half a rod of my ambush, I was able to

tossed, and sometimes hidden by the billows.  The weather, which was
and I dwelt there together, the pavilion had been a temple of misogyny.
said, unusually tall, and walked feebly with a heavy stoop.  By his side,
man turned towards the girl as he spoke; I had a glimpse of much red
slaver captain.  I never knew a character that was both explosive and
from the pleasure of startling an acquaintance, I desired to make my
the grass.  The lantern had fallen and gone out.  But what was my
night and with some mysterious circumstances, does not usually, as a
conscious of the injuries I had received in the scuffle; skulked round
busied, I mentally declared war against Northmour and his mystery.  I am

lying flat in a hollow, I could overlook Northmour or the young lady as
doubt the friendliness of their relation.  Although I could hear nothing

saw Northmour bareheaded and bowing very low, as if to apologise; and
when I slid down the face of the sand-hill, which is there precipitous,

betray me?  I was obliged to disclose myself in your interest; but if
this desolate place?  Tell me,” she said, “who is it you hate?”
in your hand.  Tell him that my camp is in the Hemlock Den, and to-night
she was clear of blame, and, though all was dark at the present, that the
I appeared at once, and leaped down upon the beach.  A remarkable air of


safe with me as if I were in Graden Floe.  I have scarce spoken to any
him.  It was not true; but I could not help myself without betraying you,
my eyes pricked and filled with tears, as I continued to gaze upon her
denied it in after days, but it was with a smiling and not a serious
relieves my heart to make this confession even now, when my wife is with
The next, and that was the fourth day of our acquaintance, we met in the
“My father is in hiding!” she cried.

seems he could have gone to prison with a light heart.  What he feared,
alarm was unfeigned and physically prostrating, and he had thought more
calamity.  He had suffered heavy loss by his Italian transactions; and
Italian man, but simply because he is infatuated with a charming English
I reached Graden Wester before ten in the forenoon; for in those days I
with the news, readily lent me an armful of newspapers, dating from a
and the day after, a telegram would announce his arrival in Cuba or
this mysterious fund still in his possession.
whether he had ever before seen an Italian in the village.  He said he
evidently belong to the same race.  A crowd of village children stood
imagine a more dismal evening; and whether it was from these external
had recently passed that way.  Not only so; but from the recklessness of
then, making a strong resolution, I was about to tear myself away, when a
Austrians to the beautiful city of Venice, then, and for long after, a
How long I may have slept it is impossible for me to guess; but I was
face, and then gone.  I asked myself the object of so strange a

grey, wild, and melancholy; the wind moderated before sunrise, and then

She laid her hand upon my arm.
We may have thus stood for some seconds—for time passes quickly with
gentleman that you must brave ruin, and decency, and common human
speak lower, for I am convinced that we are not alone.”
cemetery for my friends.”

would he cut before the evening.”
replied Clara, “but I know you are a gentleman, and I am not the least
“Do you hear him?” he asked, turning to my wife.
that she was right, for when she was gone we fell at once into a sort of

pavilion; and, there’s my hand on it, I shall act as your friend until
WE were admitted to the pavilion by Clara, and I was surprised by the
“I did not know you had so many talents,” said I.
continued to admire the preparations for defence.
“Oh, he!” cried the other; “he’s a rancid fellow, as far as he goes.  I
left in a position so invidious and irritating.

within.
green curtains lent a cadaverous shade to his cheek; and, as he sat
soured by his appearance, and the wheedling, unreal tones in which he
may be called this very night before my Maker.”
boy, Mr. Cassilis; I do not seek to deny that; but it was after my wife’s
He seemed annoyed by the question, but admitted with reluctance that he
together, by George, and no more trouble for the extra pleasure.”
“I was going to propose an occupation for the afternoon,” said I.  “Let

once more taken up his great Bible, and with tremulous hands was
never been an eager, though always a great, reader; but I never knew
enclosed it once more in a despatch-box belonging to Northmour, and
off; the sun shone quite cheerfully.
Nothing replied.  We raised our voices, and cried aloud in Italian that
quarter of the Sea-Wood, beheld a thin column of smoke rising steadily
have lain hidden in as many square yards about my path.  But I had not
walking as nearly as possible in my old footsteps, to where Northmour
that I could draw a full inspiration and relieve the weight that lay upon
where he paused.
pitiful, lost devils, both!  And now we clash about a girl!  As if there
“Well,” said he, “here is a toast in the meantime: ‘_Italia irredenta_!’”
Before we sat down to table, I looked forth from an upstairs window.  The
his glass, wiped his forehead with his handkerchief, and joined again in
mirth and embarrassment when our little party was brought abruptly to an

TELLS THE LAST OF THE TALL MAN
“Thank God,” said Northmour, “Aggie is not coming to-night.”
for a reward; and I continued to reassure her, with the tenderest

affronting death, for half a minute.

“Oddlestone” were given up, all others should be spared; if not, no one
the ambassador a string of the most abominable raillery both in English
And as it is, by God, I’ll have a kiss!”
I turned from him with a feeling of contempt which I did not seek to

Along the whole back wall of the pavilion piles of fuel had been arranged
as I had not hitherto observed.  Clara stood close by him, with her cloak
window fell in, a branch of flame shot brandishing through the aperture,
I heard him, as I stood breathless by his shoulder, with my pistol ready,

the collapse, and a vast volume of flame went soaring up to heaven.  It
mixed, strenuous, and ineffectual, like the struggles of a sleeper in a
the sudden clearness of my mind.
shoulders.
“Help her then,” said he.
“You will observe,” said I, half rising, “that I have not kissed her
But I saw, to my surprise, that he had turned his back upon me.
“Northmour,” I said, “there is my hat.  For God’s sake bring some water
him, with one word—“More.”  He had, perhaps, gone several times upon this
started from the ground; but the voice of Northmour was heard adding, in
fallen out; and, far and near, the face of the links was cicatrised with
night while you were nursing Clara; but this morning—here—take your

a nod.
took the tiller; the boat rose to the waves, and the oars between the


graves were decently covered; tall white housetops stood around in grave
passing round the bottle.
On the right, Villon and Guy Tabary were huddled together over a scrap of
At the monk’s other hand, Montigny and Thevenin Pensete played a game of
Tabary giggled.
say, Dom Nicolas, it’ll be cold to-night on the St. Denis Road?” he

“Laugh at my jokes, if you like,” he said.

or two convulsed his frame; his hands opened and shut, his heels rattled
bitterly as though he would shake himself to pieces.
hand, and put out his tongue and threw his head on one side, so as to
broke out.  “It sticks in my throat like phlegm.  What right has a man to
share of the booty, which the monk silently promised as he passed the
vapours, as thin as moonlight, fleeting rapidly across the stars.  It was
Montfaucon in this bright windy phase of the night’s existence, for one;
his left hand there stood a great hotel, with some turrets and a large
was moved with a deep sense of pathos that she should have died before
feeling of cold scales passed up the back of his legs, and a cold blow
had forgotten all fear of the patrol, which was long gone by at any rate,
only pleasure that fled laughing from his grasp; positive discomfort,
“It’s only me,” whimpered Villon.
Villon was beside himself; he beat upon the door with his hands and feet,
immense possibilities of disorderly amusement before him!  He felt quite
track of a patrol, and walked in it for some hundred yards, although it
the spot, while he was yet a child.  His mother!  If he only knew where
in the face; he remembered he was of phthisical tendency, and began
with another shudder at the recollection, “Oh, damn his fat head!” he

was by the light of a flickering hand-lamp, it looked perhaps nobler than
places.
No sooner was his host gone than Villon leaped from the chair on which he
And just then, hearing the old man’s tread returning along the corridor,
before now, and found them as black rascals as himself.  And so he



command.”
a man plays his life upon the cast; he fights in the name of his lord the
made; and when I asked some one how all these came to be hanged, I was
the bargain.  I have no trumpet; I am only Tom, Dick, or Harry; I am a

knight.  “Learn to curb your tongue when you speak with old and
“I claim the sacred rights of hospitality,” returned the poet.  “My lord,

lord of Brisetout and bailly of the Patatrac; it has given me nothing but
very far astray; but the devil is only a very weak spirit before God’s
love and faith are not only nobler than food and drink, but indeed I
God’s miracle to have any.  It seems quite natural to me; I keep it in
and vagabond.  I have passed an hour with you.  Oh! believe me, I feel
“Good-bye, papa,” returned Villon with a yawn.  “Many thanks for the cold

It was September 1429; the weather had fallen sharp; a flighty piping
the threshold.  The wind had fallen again in the meanwhile; the night was
piece of denser darkness threatens an ambuscade or a chasm in the
river ran across a weir.  The weather was clearing up, and the sky had
There seemed to be no issue to the terrace but the lane by which he had
If he were but fleet and silent, he might evade their notice altogether.
behind his weight; and though he turned in a moment, continued to swing
dark corners; the stock of a lance even rattled along the outer surface
the young man’s fancy.  It looked like a snare; and yet who could suppose
labouring in a morass; his mind seized upon it with avidity; and he stood
expression, lifted the arras and went in.
elbow on a bracket on the wall.  His countenance had a strongly masculine
redoubtable, that a man with hands like these should keep them devoutly
but courteous inclination of the head.  Partly from the smile, partly
Denis perceived that the matter was still complicated with some

The old gentleman meanwhile surveyed Denis from head to foot with a
any longer; and if I cannot make my way out in a more decent fashion, I
try to go away.  If you choose to remain a free young buck, agreeably

somewhat trying to her blushes.”
stout columns, and hung down in two rich pendants from the centre of the
hand.  It is good to be devout; but it is necessary to be polite, my
“That is not the man!” she cried.  “My uncle, that in not the man!”

is not a woman in all the world but would prefer death to such a nuptial.
you.  And I believe I have succeeded.  But before God and all the holy

most unhappy all my life.  Three months ago a young captain began to
to me with great politeness.  It contained another request to have the

The Sire de Malétroit rose to meet them with an ironical obeisance.
this window.”  And he led the way to one of the large windows which stood
and you can hardly wonder if I request you to wipe out the stain.  If you
time to see a dusky passage full of armed men.
appearance, my niece has still something to say to you.  You will not


uncle’s chair, fairly burst out sobbing.  Denis was in the acme of


there is no young gentleman in all France but would be glad of my
a very friendly listener.  Ah! Monsieur de Beaulieu,” she broke

the name of the fight, is now remembered.  No, no, madam, the nearer you

men in France who have been asked in marriage by a beautiful maiden—with
you took my part against my uncle.  If you had seen yourself, and how


you without your free and full consent.  But if you care for me at all do


shoes—you had but to look at him and you knew you were in the presence of

He, indeed, swam like a kite on a fair wind, high above earthly troubles.
narrow street, capable of standing siege when once the gates were shut,
day.”  And he turned his back upon these inconsiderable customers.
“We shall take nothing,” returned Berthelini; “we shall feed upon
despair, and even Elvira felt as if ill-fortune had been personally

his hands behind his back, to superintend the sale and measurement of
Plough—permit me to offer you this little programme—and I have come to

But the Commissary was now intent upon dinner.
thing of it in beer.  But the Berthelinis exerted themselves in vain.

thieves and bullies; and yet, as I say, he flung it down like a
enjoyed the coincidence hugely.




success, until at length victory inclined so plainly to the Commissary’s
railway expenses, and finally even to-morrow’s dinner, walk one after
try another song, but there is not six halfpence in the room.”
As they crossed the market-place the church bell rang out eleven.  It was
after eleven!  And there were several commercial travellers in the café
entrance, and a powerful voice was heard upraised and tremulous with

drag you from court to court; if there is justice to be had in France, it
He picked up the guitar-case, which had been propped against the wall,

“Stay you here, Elvira,” said Léon, “lest I should miss him by the way.

vast, and the house at the far end?”
guitar-case.  I shall lay this siege in form, Elvira; I am angry; I am

the window of his bedroom.  He was beside himself with rage.  He leaned
a maiden lady any longer.
“All is over,” said the singer.  “The serenade was perhaps ill-judged.

the four quarters on a light and tinkling measure; then followed a single
Shall we try Alceste and Célimène?  No?  Or a passage from the ‘Two


“Yes,” returned the undergraduate, sitting down, “it’s rather nice than
without indiscretion, inquire your name?” asked Léon.
the career of an artist.”
“And so you want me to be an actor, do you?” continued the undergraduate.
The singer stared at him in some surprise.


indeed, permit me to advance what may be necessary.  I ask it as a

The house in question stood back from the street behind an open space,
And the trio advanced into the turnip-field.
that absolutely blank composure known to suffering males; that colourless
“There’s going to be a free fight,” he opined.
“And the man, my angel?” inquired Berthelini, passing the ribbon of his
“Egad,” said Léon, “but that’s true.  Elvira, that is true.”
“I have it,” cried Léon.  And he broke forth into a song of Pierre
world’s centre for himself.
wearing his neck open; his blouse was stained with oil-colours in a

interesting situation.  This will not fail to touch the woman’s heart of
scanty; but there were one or two landscapes on the wall handsomely
“You are very good,” returned the other.  “But should you not draw nearer
host and hostess were left together.  Yet it was to be noted that they
borderland between sleep and waking.  But all the time she was not aware


“non—je ne me tairai pas—c’est plus fort que moi!  I take these gentlemen
“Art is Art,” swept in Léon.  “I salute Art.  It is the beautiful, the
capital water-colour sketches; he even sold one for seven-and-six.”
“If that’s a life, it is not one for me.”
“He is so, and the best of men besides,” said Elvira; “but he cannot
he could only do it, who would care?  But no—not he—no more than I can!”
plain, the smell of apple-flowers, the far and shining ringlets of a
admirably well.”
very loving painter; you have not yet tried him as a clerk.  And you
nearest way towards the inn, “it resuscitated a Commissary, created an
like a diamond.  The land breeze blew in our faces, and smelt strong of
I took the glass; and the shores leaped nearer, and I saw the tangle of

man, Vigours, never turned a hair.  He left because of the beach—said he
trouble; and he’s gone to glory, you see.  What’ll you bet they ain’t
city.  He was yellow and smallish, had a hawk’s nose to his face, pale
like a Christian, and the widow got the lot: all his, they said, and all
the keys left with the native pastor, and a letter from the runaway,
painted; my foot went along to music; Falesá might have been Fiddler’s
ship being in; and the women of Falesá are a handsome lot to see.  If
looked up at me quick and timid, like a child dodging a blow, then down

By this time we had come in view of the house of these three white men;
mosquitoes hummed about the man like bees.  Any clean-minded man would
precautionary measure.”
please himself.”
There I sat and had a meal which was served us by Case’s wife; and there
word, but smacked and mumbled with her lips, and hummed aloud, like a
marriage.  ’s Uma’s mother.”

have fled from that house, and got into the clean air, and the clean sea,
volume of a novel, and the words of his service not fit to be set down.
    Master Mariner.
The night was nearly come; the village smelt of trees and flowers and the
soul, knowing that which I was still ignorant of, believed it, every
larger—it came over me she was a kind of countess really, dressed to hear
“Me—your wifie,” she said.  It had never taken me like that before; but

She stood looking gravely down at me where I sat by the open case.  “I
new-awakened sitting up inside; and all over the green others were
But the thought of these starers stuck in my mind, and presently I came
at me, dumb and sorrowful, with their bright eyes; and it came upon me
up hand over fist, doing my five knots, like a man that meant business;
gone about ship and was sheering off the other.  Like a fool I had come

and kept me from thinking on much else.  Ben had taken stock the trip
print they wanted for their kilts and dresses, I felt as if I was in the
I supposed was an exaggeration.  But when the day went, and no business


“A 1,” says he.  “The bush is full of all kinds of birds.  I wish copra
“I shouldn’t be much the better for that, you see,” says I.  “For all I

like a dog!’  He spoke kind of fierce and eager, but sensible enough.

he was the angriest priest you ever heard of, and complained to the

less of it.  The queer thing was that I came next door to going to church
gun at the business.  Well, he looked up suddenly and caught my eye, and


“Thank you,” I said, “I’d rather stay right out here on the verandah.
whites.  What we want is a man-of-war—a German, if we could—they know how

mats laid for us over against these grandees, on the near side of the

tell them plain that I demand the reason of this treatment as a white man
fellow and the big young chief that spoke first started in to put Case
“It’s something queer,” said he.  “I’ll tell you outside.  Better come
walked away they all stood and watched us.
near me?” I cried.
was some superstition business—I never got the hang of it but it began to
They don’t seem to forget it, somehow.”

“In short, I’m afraid,” says he.
what it comes to, as well as I can make out: None of the people are to
danger for myself.’”
get dinner!”
“No,” said I.  “How would you expect me to?  We don’t have any such
was beyond anger, and meant the word simple and serious.  She stood there
She looked at me sidelong with a smile.  “You see, you get copra,” she
love; for there’s no use mincing things—Kanaka and all, I was in love
“Uma,” I said, “I would rather have you than all the copra in the South
my employers, and the strange kind of service I was doing them, when I

the white man, who was one of those rolling stones that keep going round
there and live.  It seems Case encouraged them all he could, and helped
“Well!” I said.  “And suppose I had come round after?”
on the roads.  If they went to church, the other women drew their mats

feared, to make a clean breast of the sweep that I had been.

my mind was upon other things.  I was thinking how he had jockeyed us
“It’s a place where I have private business,” said I.  “I have no idea of
“Have you had enough?” cried I.  But he only looked up white and blank,
exchanged two words with any missionary, let alone asked one for a

sober, you’ll be sorry for this.”

I led the way to my house in silence, and rather pleased with myself for
for a Kanaka, it’s us white men they lord it over.  Besides, I didn’t
it’s a dandy piece of literature, I promise you.  Since then I’ve found
better do it in native; it’ll please the old lady,” I said, giving her

our yarn, and see if you can let a little daylight in.”
look out of the window, and thanked us.
had my eye on him for nearly a year, and have rather had the worst of our
The morning before my arrival, Vigours had been sent on board the _Lion_,
harmless in itself, the sign too must be, as a bottle is neither good nor
“‘And is this Case a man of a sanctified life?’ I asked.
“I knew not what to say.  Mr. Vigours had evidently been driven out of
are to remember that I thought Namu a paragon, and was proud of the man
heard it, made my blood run cold.  It seems he was struck with a general
good pastor, an able man, and spiritually minded.  Where should I look
and referring with such plainness as I dared to recent events in Falesá.
against me, but that was not in his heart.  He has been preaching upon

“He gives himself a sight of trouble,” says I.  “And after all, what
wicked will of her.  Failing of that, and seeing a new rival come upon
years ago you would have needed no one else; but his influence is much
Galoshes called round, and made himself mighty civil, and got into a
was done—I never understood how much the natives cheated me till I had
Black Jack.  And all I want to know is just this: did you see Case’s
By that time he thought I was about as near as convenient, and lit out so
the upper part lumpy with the tops of the great trees.  Some of the trees
offered to come near my store, I found people willing enough to pass the





the bush with him once, and returned glorifying God for these wonders.
She was silent for a while.  “I think,” said she, mighty solemn—and then,

there was a boat going by here, with six young men of Falesá, “all very
brought with them.  They were scarce set, when there came out of the
have turned his back to and fled home to Falesá; but these five were like
She told me the thing was well known, and with handsome young men alone
came squalls that tore off the leaves and sent them flying, and now it
the spirits of the dead.
bush begins outright; high bush at that, trees going up like the masts of
way ahead of him, and sometimes a sort of a quick, stealthy scurry near
of.  It was all very fine to tell myself it was the branches; I knew
You may call me a coward to be frightened; I thought myself brave enough

it seemed like a box; and when I had got right up to it I near fell out
I call them trees for the bigness, but in truth they were just big weeds,
A bit along the path I was brought to a clear stand, and had to rub my
was a good forger of island curiosities, a thing by which so many traders
rocks, like the entrance to a cave.  I went as far in as the bend, and,
the most of them, like the boys again, are middling honest and yet think
eye on the other; and no sooner had we passed than we each wheeled round
Case laughed.  “We can’t stop here all day, though,” said he.
haven’t got one pound of copra but what you made with your own hands,

lively as you would want to see, and went the rest of the way home under
third native sitting on the verandah like a guest, and Uma was talking

say he bought like a gentleman: rice and tins and biscuits enough for a
thing I thought I could do was to get in first with the potting.
same contraptions right here in my verandah, and he can see for himself
company.


_Blackfriars_,’ and the date, which I can’t read, owing to its being in

Altogether, you see, I had the materials of a pretty good blow-up!
through with my powder dry between the surf and the steep hill, took all
lucifer.  Big, cold drops fell on me from the branches overhead like

colic, was the old wives’ tales, the devil-women and the man-pigs.  It
“My God Almighty, Uma, is that you?” says I.
stopped, but lit right out to come and warn me.  She was so close at my
daren’t try to go home before day, and even then it would be safer to
that’s what’s wrong with you.”
into the shine of it.  And even if I hadn’t had the wit to do that, it
have heard the match burn in the tunnel, and that bush was as silent as a

come down all afire, hair and clothes and body, not four yards away from
right over on my face to crawl after my weapon.  Unless you have tried to
kind of hopeless business.  But I never despaired nor thought upon
shot at you and miss you by a hair.  But I did, and lucky too.  A while
caught both of them with my left.  This wakened him up, and he fastened
close before me for that; and I tried to draw the knife out to give it

there ever since, afraid to budge a finger.  The ball had ploughed up her

his own ideas of hell.  I had it out with him afterwards, told him he had
reasonable figure, for she was in a hurry to get home.  As for Randall
fancy!
but the truth is, it did use to bother me, and, though I did well in
get luny over.
THE BOTTLE IMP.
could read and write like a schoolmaster; he was a first-rate mariner
garlands, and the windows were bright like diamond; and Keawe stopped and
nothing there that was not perfect of its kind, and Keawe was astonished.
dollars.”
believe me?” he added.  “Try, then, for yourself.  See if you can break
be the king of the world; but he sold it at the last, and fell.  Captain
there is one thing I could not be doing with one particle, and that is to
the devil brought it first upon earth, it was extremely expensive, and

ever.
Now, when Keawe was in the street, with the bottle under his arm, he
“And that looks like the truth,” said Keawe.
him at the first, and offered him five; but, indeed, it was a curious
“What ails you?” said Lopaka, “that you stare in your chest?”
and toys and fine carpets on the tables, for all the world like the house


and ava and bananas, it will not be more than will keep me in comfort;
us continue to obey orders.”
So he told the architect all that he wished, and how he would have that
as well take the good along with the evil.”

boxes, little men with nodding heads, books filled with pictures, weapons

to be ashamed of; and yet, if I once saw him, I should be sure of the
again, swift as a lizard; and there sat Keawe and Lopaka turned to stone.
you a lantern and a basket to put the bottle in, and any picture or fine
and listened to the clink of the horse’s shoes, and watched the lantern
and the pictures, shone as bright as the morning.  As for Keawe himself,
he came abreast of her she was done with her toilet, and had come up from

answer; so let us be stepping to your father’s door.”
time to bid me go.  I would not tell you who I was, because I have so
mountain under the cliff of tombs, and the sound of the hoofs, and the
furnaces; and as he wrought below, beside the boilers, he heard his

many-windowed, here upon the mountains.  Very bravely could I go to

was so pleased to be rid of.”
Indeed, and so he was, and little wonder.
the lee of Maui or of Molokai, he was still pacing to and fro like a wild
pleased.
everywhere in great contentment, although, to be sure, when he hinted at
and such a look in his countenance as a man may have when he is waiting

The young man was as white as a sheet.  “Two cents,” said he.
and you think I could hesitate with love in front of me.  Give me the
the light.
as it could be managed he was wedded to Kokua, and carried her up the
and sit with her on the broad balconies, joining in her songs, and, with

one), that he can yet call up a smile when he beholds you.”
“Ah, my dear! you might die a hundred times, and what difference would
us to push the bargain.  Come, my Keawe! kiss me, and banish care.  Kokua
shared, and some hope in front of him, he seemed like a new man, his feet
town low down along the shore among green trees, and overhead the
soon as they had any freedom of speech, began to push the bottle.  You
would be broken by Kokua bursting suddenly into sobs.  Sometimes they
in the verandah.  In the midst of this Kokua was aware of another sound;
him the flames of hell—ay, and smells the smoke of it, lying without
“Old man,” said Kokua, “what do you here abroad in the cold night?”
“And now,” said she, “I am his wife, whom he bought with his soul’s
roared in the trees, and it seemed to her the rushing of the flames of
“I am an old man,” replied the other, “and too near the gate of the grave
“God bless you, child,” said the old man.
will be your turn to sing and laugh.  But for poor Kokua, alas! that

three it will be quite impossible.  The margin is not broad enough, the

take no pleasure.”
him drink the deeper.
petticoat with dollars.  They’re all as false as water; you keep an eye

came noisily in, as though he were but now returned.  And, lo! by the
chest and took out money.  But he looked besides in the corner where they
She clasped his knees in a moment; she kissed his knees with flowing
“My wife has the bottle,” said Keawe, “and, unless you help me to recover
a word to her that you have come from me.”
pin.”
“You have it,” said Keawe.  “I see that.”
if you like.”

no man more cunning than that prophet; he read the stars, he could divine
in the high forest, and his head and shoulders were above the trees.
so much silver coin.
there empty.  And this was the day of the steamer; he could see her smoke

of dried herbs, and the dried leaves of trees, and a green branch of

“What was this?” cried Keola, who came to himself the first, because he
Keola went up the beach, which was of shining sand and coral, strewn with
more he considered, the less he might conceive in what quarter of the
you.”  And he had scarce opened his mouth before the young woman fled


once more shaken and blinded; and on the mat betwixt them lay a pile of

father’s manners.
found.  Remember Kamau, and how he wasted to a thread, so that his wife
“Yes,” said he, “and I may as well tell you plainly, I mean to have it.
catch fish.  Are you strong enough to launch Pili’s boat?”
nothing needed in this world but a little courage.”
sums of money which they could make by its exercise, and what they should
and goes down, and his bones are scattered with the rest, and the gods
At that sight Keola screamed and covered his face.
greatness of the man grew thirty-fold and forty-fold as swift as sight or
was heaved upon the crest, there he was striding and dwindling, and he
speech of men.  He cried out aloud and a voice answered; and in a
bowsprit in a squall.  It was no use talking.  Keola durst not stay in
of a good family and accustomed to respect.  And what was the worst of
one night in the schooner _Eugenie_; it was just such a night as this;

“What are you doing?” he roars.  “You’ll have the ship ashore!”
The time of Keola in that place was in two periods—the period when he was
All this while he kept by the inside of the island, for the huts were on
It was perhaps a month later, when the people of the place arrived—the
mat.  But about his wife there was no mistake conceivable, for she was
they were; and about the king’s palace in Honolulu, and how he was a
news to Keola.  As for the Isle of Voices, it lay solitary the most part
alone.  Only once a chief had cast a spear at one of the voices, and the
which Kalamake burned the leaves.  They found it hard to believe, yet the
She declared it was nothing.
“What is this?” he cried.  “I cannot live among devils.  I will not be
tell of eaters of men in the south islands, and the thing had always been
were done eating, he went and lay in the bush like a dead man.

killed long since.”
“and that money was made there, when it is clear that all the new coin in
taken, but the bodiless voices kept posting up the beach, and hailing and
men crying not to be described; and by the sound of them, those that he
fights, leaping and hewing with the empty air?  Even so the man-eaters

him back, and set his feet upon the mat, and made the fire.  All the time
Isle of Voices—and he was out of the body with pleasure to be clean
missionary was very sharp on him for taking the second wife in the low
to this, Kalamake has never more been heard of.  But whether he was slain
attracted me in youth and health.  I chartered accordingly Dr. Merrit’s
foundations of my future house; and I must learn to address readers from
The first experience can never be repeated.  The first love, the first
approaching.  Slowly they took shape in the attenuating darkness.
olive; and it was crowned above by opalescent clouds.  The suffusion of
Eve, impending like a pair of warts above the breakers.
crowding on the beach, and climbing and fringing the steep sides of
whites; and we might have approached a hundred islands and not found
Before yet the anchor plunged a canoe was already paddling from the
hand extended save that of the chief and Mr. Regler.  As we still
squatted cross-legged upon the floor, and regarding me in silence with
by Cæsar, and never been ruled by the wisdom of Gaius or Papinian.  By
again so menacing a reception; were I to meet with such to-day, I should
elegance.  And they are extremely similar, so that a person who has a
met in Majuro a Marshall Island boy who spoke excellent English; this he
tears, was eager for acquittal, and declared she would engage the
have seen one lady strip up her dress, and, with cries of wonder and
knowledge of our Scots folk of the Highlands and the Islands.  Not much
trick of dropping medial consonants.  Here is a table of two widespread
apostrophe, and often or always the gravestone of a perished consonant,
folk at home ran much in my head in the islands; and not only inclined me
helped me to understand, about the _Tevas_ of Tahiti.  The native was no
as we have seen, represents in many tongues of Polynesia, with scarce a
On the outside, at one end of the terrace, burns the cooking-fire under a
as well as more imperishable, than a palace.
I have mentioned two facts—the distasteful behaviour of our earliest
Corsican who had years before called him _cochon sauvage—coçon chauvage_,
only one in the hamlet.  In the second, when we came ashore upon a visit
and dressed as for a festival.  Hoka, the chief dancer and singer, the
canoe; when Hoka turned his back immediately upon the ship, so that we
Of the beauties of Anaho books might be written.  I remember waking about
thousand miles away and was anchored in a Highland loch; that when the
jewels, pencilled out the least detail of drawing.  Meanwhile, around the
repeated endlessly.  Or at times, across a corner of the bay, two natives
which I would grasp at, miss, or seize: now to find them what they
brandished their bright fans, as I have seen a conjurer make himself a
supposed ourselves alone, the immobility of our tree-top spies, and the
and the misfortune of his innocent life.  For one captain, sailing out of
palace with its guards, and the great hotel, and Mr. Berger’s band with
me one of the baseless island friendships, had given me nuts to drink,
was boarded from the other side.  It was Tari; coming thus late because
than to see him sitting there, so old, so grey, so poor, so hardly
her it was too cold, and went through an elaborate performance, shutting
perspective of centuries I saw their case as ours, death coming in like a
comely animals.  To judge by the eye, there is no race more viable; and
than a year two survivors, a man and a woman, fled from that new-created
once more on the authority of M. Aussel, the estimated figures.  And the
breach of the blue bay.  The interior of this vessel is crowded with
stones of the terrace endure; nor can any ruin, cairn, or standing stone,
the dead, have been always particularly honoured by Marquesans.  Until
love-affairs, he seeks an instant refuge in the grave.  Hanging is now
the mature Marquesan what a watch is to the European schoolboy.  For ten
men’s beards.  From all this it may be conceived how easily they meet
people sang for us in Anaho, they must apologise for the smallness of
upon the lives and memories of our successors; and where no one is to
least of the Marquesan.  Poor Taipi, the chief of Anaho, was condemned to
what I have learned his words are equally true of the Polynesian.  And
deserted ruin, as though the dead continually besieged the paepaes of the

exceedingly in their new seats.  In either case the end must be the same;
one.  On the latter the punishment was by fine; and it is related that
to see a child strike or even stone its mother, and the mother, so far
Oro was his name, and he may be compared with the Bacchus of the
mystery, pleasure, and parade.  This is the more probable, and the
Or, grant that the coming of the whites, the change of habits, and the
opium.  The Marquesas and Hawaii are the two groups the most infected
not seriously to be argued that the Samoans have escaped syphilis.
Lastly, and perhaps chiefly, so far from their amusements having been
continuing to be.  So, in certain atolls, where there is no great gaiety,
been fewest changes, important or unimportant, salutary or hurtful, there
(like children in a prison) yawn and await death.  It is easy to blame
conditions common to both epochs, and even more efficient in the past
prostituted themselves in public to the French; and bear in mind how it
promiscuous liberty.  Readers of travels may perhaps exclaim at my
obtain; I am sure they would have been never at the pains to count
and gay, I would sometimes wonder where he found his cheerfulness.  He
Since the return and the wars of the French, many chiefs have been
Our chief at Anaho was always called, he always called himself,
with the Resident; but for any practical end of chieftaincy a rag doll
being of an even blue.  Further acquaintance increased our opinion of his
But his business that morning in Anaho is what concerns us here.  The
palms; and the expedient adopted was interesting.  He tapu’d his own
to-day prevents women in some countries from smoking, or yesterday
through the bush, and when they came to a bridge waded through the water:
High Place, Father Siméon Delmar was shown a stone, and told it was the
implies a preparation of taro; in the Marquesas, of breadfruit.  And a
and not half a mile from Anaho, I was the more amazed to find a cluster
evening meal, at night your sleep will be uneasy; in the morning,
been afflicted and cured exactly like a native.
We read in Dr. Campbell’s _Poenamo_ of a New Zealand girl, who was
point.  Mr. Regler asked a native to accompany him upon a voyage; the man

fisherwomen, stripped to their gaudy under-clothes.  (The clash of the
sea-front, where the surf broke highest, Kauanui embraced the occasion to
benches were to be seen, and blackboards with sums on them in chalk.  The
introduced fractions, for which they had been taught no rule.  At first
centralised at Hatiheu, where they are supported by a weekly tax of food;
they complain particularly of the heartless indifference of the girls.


that the width of the island was interposed between the sexes.  But
gusto and expression—so artistic.  I know not whether it was more strange
is most sound in France, with a broad, clever, honest, humorous
il y en a une qui a une patte de cassé_; _il faut que je voie cela_.’  I
something worthy.  Artists, if they had the same sense of humour with the
island of Ua-pu; viewing with dizzy eyes the coves, the capes, the
idleness dangerous that he placed his capital and acquirements at the
islands—is called Tai-o-hae, and lies strung along the beach of a
in the morning (there or thereabout) with the unfurling of her flag, and
She, on being approached, declared she could never marry a man who was
The Residency stands by itself, Calaboose Hill screening it from the
they call him there) the island nightingale, will be singing home
drawings: one of the pier, not badly done; one of a murder; several of
Delaruelle, carried me one day to the calaboose on an official visit.  In
anything so perfect as the last.  To complete the picture of convict life
Theft is practically the sole crime.  Originally petty pilferers, the men
conceive how he longs to confess, become a full-fledged convict, and be
intimate, and whose hospitality I have enjoyed; and perhaps the tale
nobody ever works, and all eat opium,’ said a gendarme; and Ah Fu knew a
was only to buy opium that I stole; it is only to buy opium that anybody
ashamed of it.  French officials shake their heads when opium is
CHAPTER IX—THE HOUSE OF TEMOANA
died at last the chief supporter of Catholicism and the French.  His
absolute,—over all Polynesia, and a part of Micronesia, the rule holds
forest glades and coronals of precipice.  Here, in the strong
Or rather, upon that first occasion, we were conscious of a sense as of
held out her hand to say good-bye, Vaekehu took it, held it, and a moment
grown prim, her leg was one of the sights of Tai-o-hae; she had been

at the beating of the drums, the folk crowded to make holiday.  The
comme ça_,’ and sticking his umbrella upright in the road, he sketched
fear he was only forestalling a taunt that he had heard too often.
chiefly these that sent us so often to the map.  But it is of our parting
far as to the pier, Stanislao walked with my arm and sheltered me with
that they do not lose.  But for persons of a different stamp the
same gentleman, some half an hour later, being upon a different train of
give without any special thought of a return; yet if the circumstance

Europe, living in the Residency, and ruling by the hand of Temoana.  The
methods supervened, and the golden age (whatever it quite was) came to an
But even this rigour, so intolerable to laymen, so irritating to
for a new interest: pitched on gardening, and was to be seen all day,
confined to bed, impotent with dropsy, and tormented with bed-sores and
elbow tends to keep him in touch with Europe and out of touch with
‘_Chaque pays a ses coutumes_,’ said Stanislao; these it is the
native coadjutor.  What else should we expect?  On some islands, sorcery,
forth again to teach them offer an example to the world.  The best
the time of the yearly holiday came round at the girls’ school; and a
‘“I got ’Melican mate,” the chief he say.  “What you go do ’Melican
Missa Whela all-the-same pelison (prison); he wife, he chil’en in
stumblings of a foreigner in a language only partly acquired!  A
    savages who knew not Jehovah.  This was Mr. Whalon, and the date,
    ‘If a man have a sufficiency of these three, he is good and holy,

the vegetarian.  We consume the carcasses of creatures of like appetites,
was going down, and swim through the flush water to the rail in search of
its reason.  One of the pigs had been that morning killed; Catholicus had
this paragraph.  And so with the island cannibals.  They were not cruel;
In historic times, when human oblation was made in the marae, the eyes of
never find it in my appetite that man was meant to live on vegetables
lingered only in some low islands where life was difficult to maintain,
been found needful to forbid the art.  Their songs and dances were
properties employed offer a seizing contrast to the imagination.  Yet
the avenger takes no particular heed to strike an individual.  A family,
not tell me so, their families would be lamenting aloud upon the beach.
sea’s edge, nor, if I remember exactly, eaten of sea-fish.  Each in its
the arms were oiled, and the man-hunters swarmed into the wood to lay
by their family connections—in the Highland expression, all the commons
only here and there, as through holes in a leaky roof, a single drop
superstructure, and the scheme of the amphitheatre was difficult to
twenty strong, and some of them twelve feet high—continuously throbbed in
were privileged to eat of it, there were carried up to the dead-house the
his kilted gown, and the bright-eyed Marquesan schoolboy on the other,
good-natured ridicule, as we shame a child from stealing sugar.  We may
scene.  They are reckoned at no higher than four thousand feet; but
cap of rain and vapour fell and rose on the mountain.  The land-breezes
against the sun, and flash like silver fountains in the assault of the
and a line of rails on a high wooden staging bends back into the mouth of
circumstance alone might strike the experienced: here is a convenient
War, and was at first rewarded with success.  His plantation at Anaho was
fled incontinently to the bush, lay there all night in a great horror of
Haamau withdrew; and victory, on some occult principle, was scored to
alert, the girl escaped among the cotton; and Mr. Stewart, having thrust
was gutted, and the bodies cast in a pit and covered with leaves.  Three
missionary, who acted as intelligence department; and for six weeks Mr.
the first blood.  Captain Hart visited a bay where such a war was being
The foot of the cliffs, about all these islands, is the place of fishing.
the smoke.’  A few questions followed, as to where he came from, and what
Timau, chief of a neighbouring bay, and put some Chinese there to work.
cocking from within, and in sheer self-defence—there being no other
elects to cock a fire-arm, a gentleman advancing towards him in the open
not very successful captain, and how he had lost a vessel for Mr. Hart;
The south coast of Hiva-oa was bestrewn with building timber and
There was a certain traffic in our anchorage at Atuona; different indeed
but by the nature of his purchases.  These were five ship-biscuits, a
depressed me; and I felt, if I had been there a castaway and out of reach
We had besides a white visitor from shore, who came and departed in a
Burns, enjoys the society of the breakers.  His name and his Burns
behold again the places of his boyhood, only, perhaps—once, before he
    And first, too; only one
But our chief visitor was one Mapiao, a great Tahuku—which seems to mean
nose hooked, his face narrow, his forehead very high, the whole
_umati_—the word for the sun—and signed to me once more to place these

practitioner of some kindred mystery to his own, he manifested to the
Marquesan, I gathered that his mind was set on fish-hooks; with three of
was merely loyal.  He had been hired by the ignorant to do a piece of
sometimes lacked the sense and the civility to refrain from laughter.
was; and even more salubrious.  The healthfulness of the whole group is
undimmed, has lived, and trembled, and suffered in this place since 1843.
ravine, was choked with profitable trees.  A river gushed in the midst.
according to the highest estimate, does not exceed six hundred in the
edge.  There, in a nook of the most attractive amenity, he bade us to sit
only hold on to the stick, and bid the artist follow me to the
Michel.  We were mounted on a pair of sober nags, suitable to these rude
lie to the westward come and go in their canoes.  I never knew a hill to
fathoms of cool foliage, we struck a house upon a well-built paepae, the
whaler-man prompted her attentions to myself.  Nor could I refrain from
apart.  One of these, a girl perhaps fourteen years of age, buxom and
dishonoured fellows sitting there (all observers agree) with streaming
of love.  The sentiment of honour for the dead is therefore not extinct.

undoubtedly subordinate.  We had opportunities to observe one household
of Paaaeua, appointed chief of Atuona.  I was unable to be present at the
banquet—the child’s presence at the daily board perhaps sufficing.  We
affiliandi_, but moved by the single sentiment of curiosity.  The affair
man, falling and taking root among islanders, the processes described may
numerous, the more idle, and the more affectionate he finds his native
civilisation and reform.  And yet, were the French to go and native
night the prisoners, tantalised by the noises of the festival, renewed
strangers popular.  Paaaeua, in his difficult posture of appointed chief,
reception of some hitherto undreamed-of and outlandish potentate—some
church, and Paaaeua, highly delighted with this new appearance of his
of photography.  Thus had Moipu effected his introduction, as by
pushing his advantage.  Mr. Osbourne was inveigled to his house; various
low, cruel laugh, part boastful, part bashful, like one reminded of some
‘_mitais_’ with exaggerated emphasis, like some enormous over-mannered

strengthened and grew more continuous; presently the _Casco_ heeled down
are not more different from the Sahara.  On the one hand, and chiefly in
In no quarter are the atolls so thickly congregated, in none are they so

The rest of us were grouped at the port anchor davit, staring with no
again set down to leeward; and the best we could do was to bring the
among the archipelago.  But which?  And where?  The isle was too small
robbed of all its colour, and deformed with disproportioned trees like
trim ship, to seaward.
skirt the embankment of a railway, and the eye began to look
innocent steersman was abused—and again the _Casco_ kept away.  Had I

here and there both sides were equally abased, and we could look right
The isle was uninhabited; it was all green brush and white sand, set in
dissimilar sound announces the nearness of a mill and pouring river.

atoll, unless it be enclosed, passes wholly on the shores of the lagoon;
navigable width; conceive the tide and wind to have heaped for hours
submarine day, and these shoals of rainbow fish, have not enraptured me
the vanishing cable, the coral patches, and the many-coloured fish.
far end a belfried Catholic chapel concludes the town; and between, on a
the palm-grove, we saw the glow and smelt the aromatic odour of a coal of
greater planets drew vari-coloured wakes on the lagoon.  From shore the
of residence is more than fanciful.  Hurricanes and tidal waves over-leap
Danger is but a small consideration.  But men are more nicely sensible of
wonderful verdancy that makes the beauty of the atoll from the sea.  The
plague of flies blackening our food, has sometimes driven us from a meal
cookery through the South Seas; and cocoa-nut salad, if you be a
display; many of them dead besides, and badly rolled.  On the ocean side,
spots.  A lively little crab wore the same markings.  The case of the
doubt many of the shells in the lagoon are dead.  But why are they dead?
of an abbot; sharks swarm there, and chiefly round the passages, to feast
customs; and among other functions, some of them more awful, she

folk of the archipelago are half nomadic; a man can scarce be said to
transmigration.  Fifty odd set out, and only seven, I was informed,
first of all, by a good substantial felony, such as in all lands casts
five years.  The period, when I had the pleasure of his friendship, was
bright; the master of several trades, a builder both of boats and houses;
and this must shortly be renewed, for the earth blows away, sinks in
three rooms, three sewing-machines, three sea-chests, chairs, tables, a
side look on some native life.  Every morning, as soon as he had fed the
informed, a special favourite,—all, save some paper flowers upon the
afternoon, long cat’s-paws flawed the face of the lagoon; and presently
here, for a while, the story leaves to tell of his voyaging.
righted, and though she was still full of water put the child on board.
cotton shirt and trousers, passed the remainder of the evening on my
there was stranger matter.  Since François had lost the whole load of his
nothing native about her but the skin; and the type abounds, and is


childishly self-indulgent—the Paumotuan greedy, hardy, enterprising, a
Steven on their way to the mainland for schooling.  All were supposed to
of Teina.  He looked, thinking to perceive a crab, and saw instead the
congeners to the incapable Marquesan.  But the Paumotuan not only saves,
The Paumotuan is sincerely attached to those of his own blood and
Marquesan figures.  But the Paumotuan displays, besides, a certain
has made a home.  Many suffer; they are excluded (if Mr. Wilmot be right)
been a pillar of the Church of Rome for fifteen years; his wife dying, he
moi_,’ said he, with a fine charity, ‘_les Mormons ici un petit
the name of Williams, who made an excellent collection, and retired,
hint at a connection.  Here, then, is a singular thing: a brand-new sect,
indulgence; a bout on a feast-day, for instance, may be followed by a
rules, in this perpetual supervision, the weak find their advantage, the
Tahitian lay awake and listened to their singing with amazement.  At
attend.’  The faithful sit about the room—according to one informant,
it seems to possess no kernel of possible sense, like some that I shall
great, and the protection afforded so infinitesimally small, that I
the pains began to grow more easy and the swelling to subside.  The
cover, is for a Paumotuan a somewhat hazardous extreme.  The whole

between curiosity and age, till curiosity conquered, and they came, and
On the morning of 17th September the sufferer died, and, time pressing,
parti-coloured pariu, the Tahitian kilt; the women, with a few
her back to the grave and was playing with a leaf.  Did she understand?
with its owner; but, the family being poor, it was thriftily reserved for
sundown till the rising of the morning star the Paumotuan must hold his
perhaps understood nothing.  And lo! in the whole affair there was no
made a leap at the Resident, with pointed finger, shrieked a few words,
indeed a terrified conjuration, basely to shield herself, basely to
and sometimes an excited hearer.  But the deceit is scarce mortal, since
the mountain, buried in woods, out of all sight and cry of mankind; and
before a messenger came up the mountain from Apia with a letter; I was in
knocking; it was no hour for the dispensary, but at length he woke his
somewhat of a freethinker; at the least, a latitudinarian: he was a man,
Christianity fear of and a lingering faith in the old island deities.
these are the hours of the spirits’ wanderings.  At any time of the
and he was left astonished.
prayer that Rua-a-mariterangi attributes his escape.  No merely human
stillness, came the sound of the fall of a great tree.  Donat would have
are so still.  When the living ate the dead, horrified nocturnal
a leaf: like other things edible and corruptible.
returned before there came a rush, like that of a furious strong man,
the day came and the doors were opened, and men began to go abroad,
argued, is suggestive.  For why should a mere meteor frequent the altars
his line over the bows.  It is to be supposed that Rua slept; and when he
tips of his fingers to his mouth like one a-cold, uttered a strange,
Polynesian _varua ino_ or _aitu o le vao_ is clearly the near kinsman of
back by native pastors and interred; but this (I know not why) was
of the dead, unhappy, nowise hurtful.  And this severely classic opinion
cleanse, polish, and thenceforth carry about her, by day and night, the
the issue.  A late Resident, who died in Fakarava of sunstroke, was
horribly—was his arboreal demon.  The spirit, then, is a thing material;
are used to that here.’  The next morning these two men went walking, and
gifts.  It was in vain his wife dissuaded him.  He returned to his father
bale-fires burned in the village.  Again she asked him to carry the
than a fortnight buried, and his vampire was still supposed to go the
but already swollen with the approaches of corruption.  It is a lively
not with a like fear.  The spirit of Aana that ate souls is certainly a
first sound of feet upon the coral they dive again for ever.  They are
our next adventure was made in changed conditions.  Passage was taken for
intervened, and we had seen no spot of earth so high as an ordinary
horizon, the expanse of the lagoon, the sedge-like rim of palm-tops, the
Populous and independent—warrens of men, ruled over with some rustic
indeed a breathless place; on the ocean beach the trade will be still
churches.  Some might hold a battalion, some were so minute they could
a vista.  The proportions of the place, in such surroundings, and built
(beyond all island expectation) with coloured advertisements and cuts
On the opposite bank of the canal, on a roofed stage, an ancient
glitter and the waves to dance on the lagoon.
once oppressed with drowsiness and held awake by apprehension: a pepper
American darkey, runaway ship’s cook, and bar-keeper at _The Land we Live

The scale of his providing was at times magnificent; six hundred dollars’
countenance of none but his own wives.  These were his oarswomen; one
involuntary criminal.  But during the remainder of that reign he must
queens strangled her between the mats.
you might talk to him all day; advice, reproof, appeal, and menace alike
was perhaps jealous of their presence; being human, he had some affection
divorced by both for misconduct.  That two great and rich ladies (for
monocracy of Nakaeia and the changes of Nanteitei, the Old Men were
got together from both sides, Nabakatokia was summoned and surrendered.
the hour of the revolution, that Nabakatokia turned too late for help;
of the first nerved him for deeds of desperation; fear of the second
Corpse was chairman; the second commissioner died before my arrival; the
decomposing features, the changed hue, are thus present in the memory of
of these deeds, died at peace discoursing on the craft of kings; his tool
in San Francisco at two hundred and fifty dollars; had greatly reduced
missionary.  Two San Francisco firms are here established, Messrs.
In front, from shortly after four in the morning until nine at night, the
no human presence, only the earth and shaken forest.  And right overhead
taste; it only sparkles, and sharpens, and grows to be a new drink, not
Europeanised; the coloured sacque or the white shift are common wear, the
like an Englishwoman.
their airy roofs and clustered in the tents of the mosquito-nets.
the island, and one of the only two in the archipelago; their house
which was the club or rather the casino of the island, I regularly passed
across some interval of time, recall with pleasure the traders of
from deaf ears her forcible restoration.  The best of his business is to

He made but one condition—on the round table, which he used in the
feelings, brimmed from the man in speech and gesture.  He loved to
countenance was even saturnine.  On that day we made a procession to the
long string of psalms, hymns were sung—I never heard worse singing,—and
at least to one old gentleman the spectacle of my successful struggles
which has once provoked a revolution, and which to-day, in a man so

ages; it seemed not so much degrees of latitude that we had crossed, as
my last doubt.  We had come, thinking to photograph him surrounded by his
‘Why, what is the meaning of all this?’ I asked.  ‘Is the island on the
were doubtless pleased it should continue.  That pleasure had now
thought besides that we were here in barbarous islands, rarely visited,
It was plain we were impatiently expected; the king retired with alacrity
for a week.

awaiting fresh developments.
indignant Mr. Rick.  No, it was not royal; had the king been of a royal
You could never say the town was quiet; all morning there was a ferment
concealed, he was wrenched from the verandah and whisked along the road
woman who spied the weapon and the man who seized it may very well have
adversary’s face, shaking her like a dog; the other impotently fought and
picture haunted me of the two women, the naked and the clad, locked in

pillars on the floor.  Nowhere in all the town was any lamp or ember; not
being a sufficient mistress of that difficult tongue, was spokeswoman;
tipsy natives, twenty or thirty at a time, begging drink, fingering our
shadows thicken, the stars multiply their number; you look around you and
Three inches to one side and this page had never been written; for the
missile was a stone, aimed not to hit, but to frighten.
chiefs of Kuma and Little Makin were expected daily.  Strong in a
most gin, and sells it the most recklessly, the lion’s share of copra is
people, mindful of their debts, docile to the voice of their own
not to be thought of.  Something else had to be found; and there was one
in the darkness, and a hum and sputter of low talk that sounded stealthy.
to bed; it struck full in my face, but Mr. Muller stood in shadow.  No
‘That is nothing to the purpose,’ I replied.  ‘I know, and you know,


I ask is right.’
secure of victory.  He was but waiting to capitulate, and looked about
So far as it was anyway critical our interview here ended.  Mr. Muller
It was a thoughtless wonder.  The consolation of being second is not
that matter into our own hands, _The Land we Live in_ at the pistol’s
the United States, praying for a law against the liquor trade in the

like children at home about a circus.  It was the Makin company,
change would be introduced (I think of key) with no break of the measure,
hammering finales; all go together, voices, hands, eyes, leaves, and
miniature.  Of all so-called dancing in the South Seas, that which I saw
I may seem to praise too much; here is a passage from my wife’s diary,
almost irresistible impulse to join the dancers.  One drama, I think, I
was poetry pure and simple.  The music itself was as complex as our own,
frightened and embarrassed at first, but towards the close warmed up to
launched himself into space, and fell bulkily into the sea.  His wives
_Friday_, _July_ 26.—At night in the dark, the singers of Makin paraded
and held it there with arms extended like a backboard.  The visit was
Presently a distant sound of singing arose and approached; and a
they passed musically on up the dark road.
then,’ the word went round, ‘why then, the Bible is true!’  And on our
felt it impolite to have the least appearance of pocketing a slight; the
to his vassals who sat waiting him outside the door, and they put it at
The summer parlour on its artificial islet, relieved against the
At either end stood up to sing, or sat down to rest, the alternate

acts) are played exclusively by men; but towards the end a woman appears,
this free-spoken world, were gross enough to make a carter blush; and the
the slip, but the audience were quick to catch it, and to jeer.  To crown
applause, the company of Butaritari leaped suddenly to their feet and
population of our neighbours did the same, so that the causeway was
showed off the rafters and their shadows in the hollow of the roof; the
thirty years back the women went naked until marriage; within ten years
found an archipelago of fierce husbands and of virtuous women.  ‘Of
tinned meats.  And she who was perhaps of no regard or station among
All these women were legitimately married.  It is true that the
comparison, and compounded for a fine in land.  The male adulterer alone
wives ‘his horses,’ some trader having explained to him the employment of
I will cook some fish.’  The woman grunted at him, island fashion.  ‘I am
was thought she was a dead woman, and the natives surrounded the house in
in him or her who has inherited the lands of the clan, and stands to the
and woman watching her.  Do what she would, her guardians held her
suppressed high spirits.  Nei Takauti, the wife, was getting old; her
ministering angel in the hour of pain, while the wife displayed the
both in an ecstasy of slyness.  It was plain the lady had two names; and
it was laid down again, it was handed back and forth, and argued over,
surprising.  The garlands are much esteemed, the blossoms must be sought

only one white on Apemama, and he on sufferance, living far from court,
We were at sea, bound from Mariki to Nonuti and Tapituea, when the wind
whence they sailed.  This last attempt had been no better-starred; their
Their fare was paid by Tembinok’; they who had gone ashore from the
crowned in turn by the scattered and incongruous buildings of the palace.
sensible, ingenious character, had highly whetted our curiosity; and it
beaked profile like Dante’s in the mask, a mane of long black hair, the
A visit on board ship, such as that at which we now assisted, makes a
welcome and the fare he may pass days on board, and, every day, and
returned to shore with it, burthened but rejoicing; and late into the
to hit upon some novelty.  This he leaves carelessly in the main cabin or
battered by years of service.  Early one forenoon he came to our house,
lifting up a sheepish countenance, ‘I ‘shamed,’ said the tyrant.  It was
find he had lost all.  At this he dropped his weapons; owned he might as
Captain Reid: the ground of which is perhaps worth recital.  Among goods
betta.’


me.  ‘My chieps no ’peak—do what I talk.’  He looked at the missionary,
times added to his household a white cook, and one after another these

a time, the same hard and thoughtful stare.  As he thus looked he seemed
good man.  You no lie,’ said the king: a doubtful compliment to a writer
stayed at home, a dish was to be sent him from our table; and I solemnly
deep and shallow, and, according to the growth of the plants, presenting
shot in the air is the first Apemama warning; it has the force of a
on his head, a meerschaum pipe in his mouth, a wife stretched at his back
the eaves many score of moving naked legs.  In all the affair servile
unapproachable, like bees in a glass hive.  The outward and visible sign
the South Seas; standing some three feet above the ground on posts; the
photographs by the light of the sun, the moon, and flash-powder;
being propped at a variety of inclinations, spelled out strange, angular
land, a palisade with several gates.  These are scarce intended for
mother; his sister, a grave, trenchant woman, with much of her brother’s
the right chest, opened it in the king’s presence, and displayed her
Yet those whom he so trusts are all women, and all rivals.
palace; and the weight of the monarchy and of the monarch’s life reposes
make the warning more memorable) suffered it to putrefy before the palace
In all my coming and going, I never heard him speak harshly or express
should swear by the absurd invention.  It is founded on poker, played
he ought to be,—the sole fount of all indulgences.  And he summed the
greatly taken with the fancy, and joined with relish in the counsels of
the cabin raised, the trade blowing through, hearing their report.  Like
sympathise.  The royal annalist once read me a page or so, translating as

day, lighting one after another to their rest that prodigious company of
CHAPTER IV—THE KING OF APEMAMA: EQUATOR TOWN AND THE PALACE
whence he could radiantly produce it on the morrow.  Although this piece
anxious manner, as with a tail of an eye on the policeman: only the
strikingly handsome both in face and body, lazy as a slave, and insolent
pow-wow.  He had the impudence to pretend he was internally injured by my
glooming.  ‘I think he tavvy too much,’ he said at last, with grim
at his feet, and on either hand of him: the second Apemama warning,
bursting surf and the tropic birds, the name of the Kaupoi—the rich
and had been looking forth) asked me who it was that followed me, I
he would deny himself his natural rest to follow my variations on _The
not control his merriment.  On my side, knowing what must be the nature
(the island infirmary) was very likely privileged.  There remains only
chiep,’ or even a ‘chiep’ at all—which, as some were my excellent good
you tavvy everything.’ Yet he gravelled me often enough with his
captain had told him of Captain Cook; the king was much interested in the
the well, where they washed their linen and we drew water for the table.
Scottish minister.  ‘Eh, sir, and that I do!’ replied the widow.  ‘I’ve
rare, encounters occur to my memory.  I was several times arrested by a
same brothers_.’  It is true there was a brother once in Arden!  But we
holding on his clothes.  It is common to see two men carrying between
hearer.  Their music had a church-like character from near at hand, and
face of Tembinok’ darkened and he answered nothing.  Hesitation in the
the cook, and even in that scoundrel’s hours of insolence.  The king,
I told him I had.  He remarked that gin was forbidden, lauded the
ourselves.  Here was a people protected from all serious misfortune,
an hour in admiration of a boy at Mariki; and Te Kop (my friend in the
me, before he left, by calling me Te Kop; apostrophised me as ‘My name!’
bush for ever.  My house, of course, was unapproachable; but he knew
the repulsion mutual? and the conscientious Tembinok’, like the
be the fate of the king’s friends?  It was our opinion at the time that
while the cloth was being laid fell asleep in his chair.  His confusion,
formula of this new sort of _pain-killer_—for _pain-killer_ in the
communicated to me his plan of campaign, which was highly elaborate and
again, having done no harm.  _O si sic omnes_!
fishing, and leave crooked tracks upon the sand.  Apart from these, the
enclosing beach curved like a horseshoe, and both steep and broad.  The
his dwelling and uncanny duties.  I cannot call to mind another case of a
a mid-summer and sylvan Christmas-tree _al fresco_.  Yet we were already
native boy escorted us by torch-light.  On the way the torch went out,
black night, timorous faces of spectators.  Our sorceress began with a
the passage and skimming under all plain sail, with bubbling scuppers.
every day, he told us, to know if ships were coming in; and thereafter
bodily sickness.  He is whistled for in the Paumotuan manner, and is said
They came in a body, all in their Sunday’s best and hung with wreaths and
to catch, and the irreverent sorcerer filled in the time with talk of
A reader of the _Arabian Nights_ felt quite at home.  Here was the
with maniap’s; and one of our party, who had been there to sketch, had
in the end successfully; if that were indeed success which enabled me to
professed an unbridled passion for the boxes, and asked and obtained
wife had returned (even as she had vanished) unseen, and now sat,
with consternation in their faces.  The pretty girl crept to my side; it
discomposed, her voice (which scarce ceased from warning and
Smothered in a corner, dormant but not dead, we have all the one touch of
against the return of the schooner.  Tembinok’, Rubam, and one of the
little in the thicket, Mrs. Stevenson saw a clear space, a fine mat
Tembinok’.
fact that I succeeded.  He demurred at the principle; he exclaimed, when
but the wife beamed; and there was an old gentleman present—her father, I
lips.
and violent paths of kingship like a strong man to run a race, or like an
his descent to a shark and a heroic woman.  Directed by an oracle, she
not for arts or knowledge.  ‘My gran’patha one thing savvy, savvy pight,’
perhaps scarce conscious that he was in all things the creature and
lifetime, the resistance of three islands.  He made his brother
dusk, when he came on a lighted village of some size, was directed to the
became greatly changed; a softer, a more melancholy, and, in particular,
bottle.  The king did not partake, but sat sighing and smoking a
name his uncle, or indeed employ the word.  The same day he sent me a
mouth; he who had been so ready to confound was now careful to
rebellion, and the man who had gained a kingdom for a weakling brother
he drove out his uncle, drove out the author of his days?  Here is at
DEDICATION.
he will relish the pleasure, which should have been ours, to follow among
ultimate islands.  And I admire and bow my head before the romance of

handle; the second, the place that I was in.  The tall, black city, and
armourer’s, where I got a plain sword, to suit with my degree in life.  I
chance to find a friend, let be another stranger.  Suppose him even to
William Grant Esquire of Prestongrange, Lord Advocate of Scotland.  Mr.
hurt, only for my new clothes—and we took shelter under a pend at the
insinuating: he waved his hands plausibly as he went, and his face was
listen.  The lady scolded sharply, the others making apologies and
me a little longer, and perhaps with more surprise, than was entirely
was here a different ingredient; it was plain the girl thought I had been
She made me a little, distant curtsey.  “There is no harm done,” said
week ago I was on the braes of Balwhidder.”
smell of that place and the roots that grow there.”


took some note of him for a short, bandy-legged, red-haired, big-headed
upon the pipes.  Besides which, I have offered myself to be your friend,
and we wait upon the King’s street to catch him; and now we give him his
and if you will just say ‘a friend to Miss Catriona’ I will see you are
three hours in the city; but if you will give me your direction, I will

very acquant in Embro!”

with law papers.  In the inner chamber, which opened from it, a little
at this present being.  And the bits of business that I have to propone
that sent me, I will let his token speak.”  And I showed the silver
“That is my part of the affair, Mr. Stewart,” said I.  “Here is a bag of
friend.  I can only wish he had been better guided.  And an accused
for yourself how I come to be so much mingled up with the affairs of your

“I was thinking of two pounds,” said I.
I would be glad to know if I could get some spending-money back.  It’s
accident, for it would never do if the Lord Advocate were to get any

Alan’s button there, the four quarters of Alan wouldnae bribe me further
“We’ll have to see about that,” said I; “I’m stiff-necked when I like.”

“Well, and so ye will hang!” said he.  “Ye’ll hang beside James Stewart.
“It’s a different way of thinking, I suppose,” said I; “I was brought up
me across the water.  I’m a lawyer, ye see: fond of my books and my
told them it was nonsense: muckle they cared!  And there was I cocking
ye—you that’s no Stewart—to stick your head so deep in Stewart business.
deevil! and has smuggled out more French recruits and trafficking Papists

just dealer.  How say ye, Rob?”

to cast myself down; that I had clambered up, through so many and hard
such particular anxiety whether for Alan or me.
recognised, and dragged into the Appin murder by the heels; and, no
This train of reasoning brought me to a more resolved complexion; though
braeside among fields.  There was a whirr of looms in it went from house

ye.”


fell out, it’s my opinion (and it was Rankeillor’s before me) that you
complication, which it is judged you would be blythe to avoid a knowledge
warran-dice against all deadly.”

He held up both his hands.  “Sirs! sirs!” cried he.
Balfour,” said I, “and I will direct your attention again to Rankeillor’s
which I will seal without closing, and give into your hands open, as the
    friends, who will watch with hopeful anxiety the event of his success

only for this strong drawing to have done with my declaration out of hand
“Is anybody there?” he asked.  “Who in that?”
a business-table.  It was a long room, of a good proportion, wholly lined
“I am pleased to make your acquaintance, Mr. Balfour,” he said, when he
to our better acquaintance!  In what way can I serve you?”
humour—which is far from the case—I believe I might lay a claim on your
any ill-judged intention of amusing yourself, are like to prove extremely
dye which cannot permit any clemency.  Blood has been barbarously shed.
persons.”
who has fallen martyr to his duty—as who else but the Campbells have ever
recommended.  There is a good honest Whig name to this letter,” says he,
I saw what way he was driving.  “I suppose it is needless anyone should

“H’m, true,” said he, “I had forgotten that.  And do you know, Mr.

“He was alone.”
(unless you be more careful) may prove to be in vain.”
displeasure, I must bear it as I may.”
it has the force of necessity.  I will open this out to you, if you will
already twice forgiven; a fomentor of discontent, and (whoever may have
“I am a man nursing with both hands the interests of this country,” he

in.  It was the Duke and the great clan of Campbell.  Now here is a
pursued his lordship, holding out a finger as he paced; “and I give you
man yet—the plain duties must suffice.  I can think but of two things, of
“My lord,” said I, “I have slept in worse places.”
“Let me see,” he continued.  “To-morrow is the Sabbath.  Come to me on
is more than I am like to do.”
interview with Prestongrange, inhibiting me from all attention.  I was
eyes speeding here and there without rest about the walls of the small
me,” said I.
publicity—I have shown my face and told my name too often in the beards
with your kinsman, you must suffer me to grasp your hand.”
“In the year you refer to, Mr. Macgregor, I was getting skelped in the
the meanwhile I am held naked in my prison.  I could have wished it was
beggar, when Prestongrange appeared in the doorway and bade me eagerly
he, turning to the three younger ladies, “here are my _three braw
so long a patience with me.  The aunt indeed sat close at her embroidery,
ease, and being reminded of Alan’s air that he had taught me in the hole
then again:
was ever wishing to hear your tune again you are to ask for it by mine.”
I stood beside her, affecting to listen and admire, but truly whirled
close.
hand of it with these fine maids, it was perhaps something their own
If this visit to the family had been meant to soften my resistance, it
There was a man waiting us in Prestongrange’s study, whom I distasted at
I was thus left (in a sense) alone with perhaps the last person in the
your authority he is fully possessed of my opinions.”
your own interests and those of the country so much better than yourself.
me.  And let me tell you, for a young fellow of spirit and ambition like

murder; your long course of secresy—my good young man!” said Mr. Simon,

blow: clothes, a bottle of _usquebaugh_, and
shrill voice, “see this paper that I pull out of my pocket.  Look at the
Prestongrange shut his book with a snap.  “I told you so, Simon,” said
These were very good words, and I could see besides that there was little
hold a candle, I must not let that extend to innocent members of my
all that I had heard and read, and joined on with what I had just

already for James More, to whom I thought Mr. Simon must have pointed
CHAPTER VII—I MAKE A FAULT IN HONOUR
I sat by the lake side in a place where the rushes went down into the
her a lass of a clean honour, like a man’s; I thought her one to die of a
it was sure enough I might very likely sleep that night in a dungeon, I
I told her I was after Miss Drummond.

approval.  “I thought ye had just been a cuif—you and your saxpence, and
daughter: a fine charge I have gotten; but it’s mine, and I’ll carry it
her father, or the gallows either, that keeps the two of us apart.  As
red-mad about the Gregara, and proscribed names, and King James, and a

“If you think me a spy,” I broke out, and speech stuck in my throat.  I
I had never been used with such expressions from a lady’s tongue, the

and prove myself a man; and I had so much sense as blush that I should be
might with Alan.
“They think the same of you, Miss Drummond,” I replied, “and were all
you, yet I could have run from the Miss Grants.  And I was afraid of your
“You saw James More?  You will have spoken with him then?”
know.”


nothing but a by-word—Catriona, how can I go through with it?  The
am bewitched to say these things!”
away by the roadside in common talk!  ‘There is one thing clear upon our
“Catriona,” said I, looking at her, hang-dog, “is this true of it?  Would
told her all that matter much as I have written it, my thoughts about her
part of that night walked by myself in the barley-fields, and had such a

must thank for this crowning mercy, and I do thank you gratefully.  After
contrived?”
hand; this is a private interest of my own.  You say you encountered Alan
“I cannot guess your reason for so thinking, my lord,” I replied, “but
salt on Alan’s tail.”

keeper.  The way there was a little longsome; the two younger misses
kicked them from the park.  I daresay, upon their side, they grudged me

would learn the English language first.”
me show ye the way?”
likely stick at nothing; and that to fall by the sword, however
from Alan, and was besides a good deal affected with the proximity of
had to stand up before “shentlemans” when I did not know the back of a
up a second time to be the actor for my private enemies.”

is as ancient as the Bible, and the words of it are: “_Surely the
murmuring of several voices in the room within.  The truth is, they were
with Palfour in the Hunter’s Pog, which I am now fery sorry for, and he
more officers.  I will not consent to fight my way through the garrison
no longer,” he exclaimed.  “Either come to an agreement, or come to a

the son of Duncan, I thought there was perhaps a fourth in the
door, the which he looked behind us after we had entered.  The house was
accepted, and I was to travel to Inverary with the Advocate, no less.”

would be obliged if anyone would show me where he has lived forty days
your ear, Mr. Balfour—they’re not seeking Alan.”
ears that James and the witnesses—the witnesses, Mr. Balfour!—lay in
so he _recommends the commanding officer to let me in_.  Recommends!—the
no right to hold the witnesses; but am I to get a sight of them, that
_military man notoriously ignorant of the law_ that shall command the
“I suppose it would likely be King George,” said I.
had it set again—printed at the expense of the defence: _sumptibus moesti
than he opened his mouth and gave me his opinion in two words, dwelling
Lady Grange.  Bet me what ye please—there was their _expedient_!”
hearing, James will have made his peace, or else he’ll have escaped; and
upon your tongue; and there’s neither time, risk, nor money to be spared

It was about half-past three when I came forth on the Lang Dykes.  Dean
daughter; as for the other Highlandman, if I was to be startled off by
scarce have seen more clear in her designs.  Maybe I was _countryfeed_;
and then I could have beaten the old carline wife with a cudgel; and now,
“Tell me,” she said.  “My cousin will not be so long.”

will say yourself it is a driech business; and it is not that I want to
king?” she asked.
omitted in my first account of my affairs.
judge my father and not know him?”
“It is rather singular how little you are acquainted with,” said she.
when our forefathers will be fighting for it against Rome and Alexander;
sharply and the shadows to run out long, I rose to take my leave.  For my
but I put you very high.  You are true, you are brave; in time I think

I bowed and left her.
I was all strung up to meet and to resist an onfall.  No such thing
here.  I would like it ill, if it was by that means we were brought to
Edinburgh I think I can show you another of that.  For sure you have some
Catriona set her fingers to her lips and whistled once, with an exceeding
civility in that particular, I could have laughed out loud for
“But I must find some means to know,” said I.  “I cannot continue to go
She said never anything to that, but continued gazing at me with the same


nothing the least material to help myself.  To tell the truth, I fancied
as Stewart had counselled me to profit by, and I ran by the side of the
have any jealousy of where I was: and going a little further home into
with which I had meted to Catriona that same night; how I had prated of
fortunes, and devote some hours of my youth to courting Catriona, which
by self-indulgence must be cured by self-denial; the flesh I had pampered
self-indulgence; to have endangered them again, and now on a mere design
“God, man, but I’ve been wearying to see ye!” says he.  “I’ve had the

bloodied the nose of one, I mind, when I was still so wambly on my legs
ye?” he asked.
“And I think your own two eyes will have seen me drive that number, or
generally rather a bauchle of a business.  Now the Gregara have had grand

“Have with ye, then!” says I.  “Do ye gang back where you were stopping?”
CHAPTER XII—ON THE MARCH AGAIN WITH ALAN

“And what was that?” said I.
“I feel like a gomeral,” says he, “to be leaving Scotland on a day like
new out of yon deil’s haystack.”
“The goodman brought me my meat and a drop brandy, and a candle-dowp to
“What were they about?” says I.
“In troth was I!” cried I.
walk no step beyond this place upon the road till ye can do yoursel’ and
“Na,” said he, “but three times!”

Could not a cadet of _Royal Ecossais_ get a furlough, slip over the
something better to attend to.  But what can I say that make songs?”
rather say, like a diversion.  He engaged the goodwife of the house with
back-going town, about half full of ruined houses; but the ale-house was
should get the principles, it’s like a trade.  Now, if this had been a
start.

we should be stirring.  But where to?—deil hae’t!  This is like old days

intelligence!”
it’s no you they’re seeking, I think it’s me; and I think they ken fine
believe I’ve still a chance of it.  It’s this way, Davie.  I’m no trysted


right, the top of the Berwick Law; and it was thus we struck the shore
those of North Berwick straight to the sea-fishing from their haven; so
we’re safe; but I’m nane sae muckle nearer to my ship or the coast of
“I ken that,” said Alan.  “I ken naething else, as the French folk say.
stood up myself, but lingered behind him, scanning the sand-hills to the
boatie row, or my craig’ll have to thole a raxing.”
This thing has been gone about too secret; pistols they may have, but
“This is a fine, bright, caller place to get shot in,” says Alan
damned first.”
are they to bring ye in with James?  Are they folk to be trustit?  Would
had caught them unawares; their whole party (as I was to learn
cry of several voices.
hesitating.
were folk there, observing me, upon some secret purpose.  They were no
and if I were to show bare steel I might play straight into the hands of
speech or hurry.  Every eye was upon mine, which struck me with a strange
watch from my place the progress of my friend’s escape.  I saw the boat
Neil Duncanson,” said I, when the rest had moved away.
tied under the horse’s belly, and we set forth under the guidance of the
produced provisions) I was given oatmeal bread and a pitcher of French

full of fish-scales, with which I was glad to cover myself.


the thole-pins echoing from the cliffs, and left us in our singular
and pass days together on the crag; and we found the man at home there
spare me your mockery, which I own I like ill.”
_Seahorse_, Captain Palliser.  It chanced she was cruising in the month
The _Seahorse_ came straight on till I thought she would have struck, and
All the time of my stay on the rock we lived well.  We had small ale and
hermit’s cell; who built or dwelt in it, none may know, and the thought
my head.  He was extraordinarily well acquainted with the story of the
material impossibility, rock and the deep sea, prevented me from fresh
injustice impossible to be supported.  With that another train of thought
eye upon that paper you may change your note.”

ragged John-Hielandman on August 30th, carried to a rickle of old stones
“I ken naething by him,” said he.  “I hae nae trokings wi’ Lovats.”
He heard me out with some serious interest, and when I had done, seemed
here wi’ Andie an’ the solans.”
their master’s neck.  All understood a word or two of English, but Neil
could find no means to follow their example—I would see him sit and
but merry to hear; and it was in the calm days that a man could daunt
his body.” {13}

the Days of the Persecution.  The perishin’ cauld chalmers were all
hashing at Christ’s Kirk.  But the truth is that he resisted the spirit.
gairden his lane at the praying when Tam and the lass cam by; and what
there was Peden glowering at him, gash an’ waefu’; Peden wi’ his lang
garrison, and kent the gate to handle solans, and the seasons and values
cawed the shuttle, but his een was steeked.  We cried to him by his name,
ower and ower the same expression, how little he likit Tod Lapraik and
craig, and the sea belaw, and the solans skirlin and flying.  It was a
now it wroucht and warstl’t like a thing dementit.  There never was the
than he gied the ae squawk, but laighter, like a body disappointit, and

in Castleton.  He’s no lang deid neither, or ye could speir at himsel’.
that could have brought a man, and the key o’ the prison yett hung ower

This was ower true, and Sandie was a wee thing set ajee.  “Aweel, Edie,”

feckless, doddered men; and then I mind upon Tod Lapraik dancing a’ the
The grawn folk were nane sae muckle better; there was little said in

keep the tongue of ye inside your Hielant chafts!”
in his hand that moment.
tender of my safety.  But if I thought Andie came not very well out in
grant, and it seemed cruel hard I should be posted as a liar and a
good show of argument.

James began to succeed to the possession of my spirits.  The 21st, the
observed and his discretion rewarded.”  So ran the first, which seemed to
be the friend.  But who should the writer be, to have her billet thus
continually mingled with caresses, and he had scarce ever, in the midst
I was in this frame, my heart beating, the grey eyes plain before me like
He told me nothing was changed.
in the east, my road lies westward: keep your boat, I hire it; let us
advantage yet.  We can leave these Hielandman behind us on the rock, and
mair I think of it, the less I see we would be required.  The place—ay,
sound of the men’s voices.  To what terrors they endured upon the rock,
writ, by the boat’s lantern, a few necessary words, aboard and Andie
after two I was in the saddle and on the full stretch for Stirling.  In a
Where I had wandered in the interval perhaps the horse could tell.  I
out with every gust.  The more part of the night we walked blindfold
one delighting to pursue an argument.
like an eager horseman in the saddle, his lips moving with relish, his
thence it voyaged to the hands of Mr. Erskine; thence again to Argyle,


I’ll never despair.  The oak shall go over the myrtle yet; we’ll ding the
James Stewart’s counsel were four in number—Sheriffs Brown of Colstoun
in league with him, and consenting, perhaps immediately assisting, in the

woman was still in durance; my friend Mr. Hope of Rankeillor did what was
Glens.

replaced.”  He seemed to shine with cunning as he said it.  “And I need
“Gentlemen,” cried he, charging his glass, “here is to Sheriff Miller.
could scarce forbear smiling at a kind of innocency in these old
“To proceed, then,” said I, “will it do any good to Scotland?  We have a

fellow before he was yet twenty.  As for James, it seems—at this date of
client.  Perhaps his Majesty would have the goodness to feel a certain
Thereupon they set themselves, not very enthusiastically, to draft the
evidence and adduce that of others before any commission of inquiry—and
in gaol.”
“So, Mr. David, this is you?” said he.
part and another which he seemed to weigh and compare the effect of.  His
consideration, as that I should deny myself any credit I can fairly
“You do me no more than justice,” said he.  “I have fought as hard in

even that, when we shall come to Edinburgh, you should alight at my
enough; that he could wish to take me up and serve me seemed impossible;

is given and taken—bought (if you like it better) and sold; no memorial
No doubt but there was much of the truth in what he said; if James was
perhaps, I had not been a scruple too good-natured.  But there was the
Duke’s words I am quite sure I have correctly; and since that famous
are near all forgot.  I remember one began:
    “Then up and spak’ the Duke, and flyted on his cook,
may still be seen on the fourth page of the list: “James Drummond,
The following day, Prestongrange and I, with a considerable company, set
That he should affect to find pleasure in my discourse almost surprised
the by-name by which I went behind my back confirmed it.  Seeing me so
overflowed my spirits I had a glisk of pleasure.
_Fair gude s’en and fair gude day_, Mr. David.  These are the same young
you have never referred to their existence.”

“And yet it is serious in a sense,” said he; “for this rogue of a
Whereupon thus came out of me the not very politic ejaculation:
the malefactor is a _protégée_ of his lordship my papa.  I am sure your
ayout Dumblane,’ and it’s thought that poor Scotland will have to console
affectionate playfulness.”
me strangely.  I could see that even Prestongrange admired, and could not
bargain?”
“Youth is a hasty season; you will think better of all this before a
but a rough country tongue.  I think it would be only decent-like if I

Indeed, he had some cause for gaiety, having now found the means to gain

where I rencountered with James More.  He read the note scrupulously
“She’ll have gone home to Lady Allardyce, I’m thinking,” said I.
this day of all days.”



“What brings you to my poor door?” she cried, speaking high through her

stirrup on and scrambling for the other.
I should not fail to say she was dressed to the nines, and appeared
“I was so bold as to suppose so upon inference,” said I, “and it was
you to desert your charge?  ‘He has thrown her out, overboard, his ain
“Do you call her by that name to her face, Mr. Balfour?” she asked.
face; am I not bonnier than she?”
“By which you will please understand that I am like the cock in the
and obliged if you could tell me what brought you here at such a time of

to comment on my attractions!  From that hour you may date our
of myself.  She suited her action to my words: down she went upon her
“He has been a good man to me,” said I.
think of her in such hard hands.  Do you think I would presume, because
“Me?” I cried, “I would never dare.  I can speak to you, Miss Grant,
I see I shall have to be your speaking board.  She shall know you came to
never heat nor melt me out of that, so you may spare me your sheep’s

French, so as to be more prepared to go to Leyden; I set myself to the
The two younger misses were very willing to discuss a point of my
that we were strangers, and speech not being required, it flowed the more
“There is my home,” said I; “and my family.”

alone—indeed, I believe her father wrought all day in the fields—and she
with a’ my heart.”
About candlelight we came home from this excursion.

I bethought me I was fighting with a woman, which is the same as to say a
may meet again.  All your friendships have been told me by my loving
confidence because they were of his own clan and family.  These kept her
little friend many times in the week, and carried her my news whenever
Here, upon some pretext, Miss Grant left me one day alone with Miss
lass of Limekilns.  I wanted her to see what I could make of you, when I
found I was locked in; thence back to Miss Ramsay, crying for the key,
“I am sorry you was disappointed,” says she demurely.  “For my part I was
“Love is like folk,” says she; “it needs some kind of vivers.” {22}
time, on November 8th, and in the midst of a prodigious storm of wind and
not a pennyweight of difference; and the villains of that horrid plot
Prestongrange I could, of course, say nothing; for I had already been a
can come ashore again and seek Katrine for yourself.”
to mind that I have given you any right to presume on our acquaintancy.”
else.”
be your friend.”
CHAPTER XXI—THE VOYAGE INTO HOLLAND
left to walk about upon the deck, viewing the prospect and wondering a
young, comely tree.  She had now a kind of pretty backwardness that
    “DEAR DAVIE,—What do you think of my farewell? and what do you say to
Then we had time to look upon each other more at leisure, which we had
“And yet she cared no more for Alpin than what she did for a kale-stock,”


his daughter in the place of him.  But for James More, my father, I have
pardon or offence.”
to attend upon the table; and it came about that Catriona and I were left
witty; and I was at a little pains to be the _beau_, and she (I believe)
mind, I am not very sure that ever I asked myself; and what was in my
the most egotistical persons in the world.  It befell one day when we
in brigades in the same set of tartan; they were not backward at the
many’s the time, and my heart great in me for terror of the darkness.  It
married again upon my Uncle Robin, and went with him awhile to kirk and

when he went to Glasgow to a merchant’s house, that was his second cousin
“Will you let me read them, then?” says she.
asleep.  So it befell that after I was come into the fore-part of the
I told her “Yes,” with a drooping voice.
she, quoting my own expression.

over the case of the poor men.
surrounded with others, that I must watch a long while before I could
the showing of that letter, it cannot touch Miss Grant.  She wrote not to

cloaks, others mantled in the ship’s tarpaulins, all clinging on by
and the patroon of the boat scrupled at the risk, and the first was in no
last.  I thought it very idle and indeed wanton in the girl to be so
others looked the more sorry, and Mr. Gebbie fall outright in a passion.
which I managed not so elegantly but what I fell with two of the fishers
stockings than would be thought genteel in cities.  There was no minute
_Rose_ had got her anchor and was off again before we had approached the
passion; and I daresay it would be rather coldly that I asked her, as the


the lie was originally the father’s, not the daughter’s, and she thus
upon the causeway.  Sprott was within, upon his ledgers, in a low
he was.”
“Will you ding me daft?” he cries.  “I tell ye I ken naething and care
honest, canty auld fellows—my bark is waur nor my bite.  To hear me, ye
turn out a dear affair for Sandie Sprott.  The man’s as guid’s my
This word I wrote and sealed; which while I was doing, Sprott of his own
I will never be easy till I have you safe again in the hands of Mrs.
CHAPTER XXIII—TRAVELS IN HOLLAND
own French failed me.  Trying a street at a venture, I came upon a lane
Gebbies into the High Germany, and we had no other acquaintance to fall
carry her suddenly away.

her, in the manner of what we call a smuggler’s walk, belabouring my
and there was now but the one way to get to Leyden, and that was to walk
I have been a bad ungrateful girl to you; and do what you please with me
over the ‘_seven Bens_, _the seven glens and the seven mountain moors_’.”
I caught in my breath sharp and came near falling (for my pains) on the

“Well,” said I, “this beats all that ever came to my knowledge; and I

It was an eerie employment to walk in the gross night, beholding only

The rain passed ere day; it was but a sloppy morning as we came into the
because I think the worst is over, but we have still a good tramp before
heat of admiration.  For it always warms a man to see a woman brave.

“If you think that it would do,” says I.  “I own it troubles me.  I would
“No, but I ought to warn you,” I began; and then bethought me I was the
method to dispose of her.  And I daresay inclination pulled me very
There is a garden in that city we were bound to, sanded below with clean
Here I fell in a panic.  Suppose he accept my tale (thinks I), suppose he
and knowing that my money was good enough, however it might be with my
prettiness, for which I scorned him.  And as soon as he had found a cover
any sun at all, it shone direct in our two chambers.  From a tavern hard
spirit of the thing, and her eyes shining.  It pleased me to see her so
By the end of this merchandising I was glad to leave her at the door with
should alarm her delicacy, she had no retreat.  Besides I was her host
think of, I relaxed from these grave considerations; whereupon my mind
very finely swept, and the fires glowing in the two chimneys.
out all the good effect of my last speech.  In this direction progress

Christian.
much left to solitude, she came to greet my return with an increasing
then I would fall again into wonder at the simplicity of woman, from whom
the annoyance began to fade away out of my mind; and spying in a window
than it was worth) hanging in the leafless tree.  I stood by the side of

thought tenderly.
We had our walk daily.  Out in the streets I felt more safe; I relaxed a
than thus to kneel down alone with her before God like man and wife.
have caught her up and run with her into the uttermost places in the
civilian, with more seeming abstraction and less understanding than

clasping me tight.  I saw in a mere whirl like a man drunken.  Then I


place.  I had a wild thought of marrying out of hand; and the next moment


breeches, I believe I took a leaping step backward like a person shot.
necessary we two should have an explanation.”
I will do him the justice to admit that he turned pale.


“But this is what I cannot understand the least,” said James.  “My
think you show a very small degree of gratitude to me that did.”


I have learned to be more patient.  And I believe you forget that I have
hose, recalling the man’s impudent mendicancy at Prestongrange’s, I
honourable to myself) if you were to regard yourself in the light of my
in.”
“I shall make it my business to see you are supplied,” said I.

had thrust her from me with violence; I had called aloud upon her in the
More, having sped so ill in his interview with me, or had his mouth
more she came forward, the farther I drew back; the more she betrayed the
I thought) at me, observed he had affairs abroad.  I took this for a hint
David,” said he, “since you are so obliging as to propose it, you might
It was some distance to that tavern.  He talked all the way of matters
situation to be kept in view, and the rather scant measure of

“It was not unkindly meant,” I replied.  “What ails you, Catriona?  What
She began this very pale; but before she was done, the blood was in her
for you.”
hands reached forth.
my length and more than all my height in a few seconds; but, indeed, I
her.  Indeed, I thought myself but an eyesore to the girl, and a reminder
same kind of high good nature.  Indeed, he had an outside air of
been wholly genuine.  There were times when he would be the most silent,
song, with a great deal of boggling and much expressed contempt against
night’s drinking in some tavern.  There were times when I was tempted to
and my own complete accession to my rights.  Rankeillor’s was, of course,

and indeed he has no true right to use the name of Stewart, he was very
arrived, to address her by a handle, “I am come into my kingdom fairly, I
we must all go, all go.  And if the gentleman was so far from your

the one thing betrayed him, and that was his face; which suddenly shone



shall do well together.”

the least unwillingness, as I have reason to fear—marry her will I
“This is to quibble,” he cried.  “You turn your back upon the fact.  The
are to sit here in company till her return: upon which, without either
What with the size of the man, his great length of arm in which he came

CHAPTER XXVIII—IN WHICH I AM LEFT ALONE
in the midst between two destinies, and could not tell whether I was
to let me speak through first of all, and not to interrupt me till I have
supposed that our affairs have got so much ravelled up (as I was saying)
“He told you to!” she cried.  “It is no sense denying it, you said

father.”

going to be a collieshangie when we two get home.  Take my word for it,




a queer pirn to wind.”
me to breathe deep; it seemed there was not air enough about Leyden to
consider how very poorly they were likely to fare when Davie Balfour was
guessed, and more good humour about the man than I had given him the
myself.”
sick of her and you.  What kind of a damned trade is this to be a parent!
speak to herself, you may be certain I would never dream of trusting it
“Let me hear no more of it!” says I.  “You have got me to that pitch that
was the blow that I felt sorest, perhaps because it was the last; and I
and sometimes dropping them with my tears.  All the heart was gone out of
that she had ever conceived the idea of that keepsake, than concerned
This was to England and to see Lord Holderness; and it has always been a
    Our manner of life is very much alone, but we solace ourselves with
Below it began again in the hand of Catriona:—
nature of Alan’s commentary upon those I gave.
with me.”
it?  It’s this way about a man and a woman, ye see, Davie: The weemenfolk
trade?”
I should visit them at Dunkirk.
come here; my business with him opens a very wide door.”
see your lassie then.  What say ye, Davie?  Will ye ride with Alan?”
of a small brae, and there appeared out of the darkness a dim light in a

“Many is the dozen times I will have heard him tell of you; and I love
And now there’s one thing sure; you and me are to be a pair of friends.
to be jealous; and he kept the talk so much in his own hand, and that in
in it; for, James More returning suddenly, the girl was changed into a

try for yoursel, my bonny man!  But what’s that neepkin at your craig?”
the sea, yet out of all view of it, and beset on every side with scabbit
my bedfellow, and was warming myself at the fire or walking to and fro

yon French nobleman, Davie; and I daresay you could find an employ to

among the sandhills, the fine morning would decoy her forth; and once I
when I recognised the trim of the _Seahorse_.  What should an English
observed the officer to remain behind and disappear among the bents.
“Will you forgive my having followed you?” said I.

“Try to put up with me,” I was saying, “try and bear me with a little.”
“I have nothing left to give or to keep back,” said she.  “I was all
With that she wept also, and our tears were commingled in a perfect
summon up the past by the sound of it, and to gaze across on her, and to

place is dangerous-like, and the English ship being here, and your father
not, as he thinks fit.”

“I should ken her, too,” says Alan.  “I had fyke enough with her when she
one in the French, and then the door of that inn to be opened and shut.”
He opened it, glanced it through, and flung his hand in the air.
“Are ye there with it?” says Alan, looking back.  “The best day’s work

of Bazin’s inn.

I saw a little surprise in James’s eye; but he held himself stoutly.

letter here in my pouch.  You’re by with it, James More.  You can never
them.
“Will you be killing him before my eyes, and me his daughter after all!”
kerchief, he white as a rag.  I knew him well enough—I knew it must have



there was a chair broken, Alan had sat among his dinner things, James
ran so that I was distressed to follow him, and marvelled and exulted to
He stopped running at once; and mopping at his brow, “They’re a real
seemed the most prudent to carry the girl to Paris to the hands of her
he drew a long face at that.
and like to die.  I thought I saw by my wife’s face what way her
him to die in.  But even now I find I can scarce dwell upon his end with
tomb was quite beyond me, till at last I considered the date would look
Limekilns was the lass that rocked your cradle when you were too small to

                                   THE
green, intricate country.  It feeds in the spring-time many splashing
Agriculture has only begun to mount above the valley.  And though in a
Francisco, there can be few drearier scenes than the Vallejo Ferry.  Bald
face or voice—these are the marks of South Vallejo.  Yet there was a tall
variety and invariable vileness of the food and the rough coatless men
of a bird.  Its stately head, blue as a sapphire on the paler azure of
thicket and then wood began to clothe their sides; and soon we were away
Helena is not only a summit, but a frontier; and, up to the time of

paper—they all have papers); and here certainly is one of the hotels,
amongst the number—bit the dust.  The grass was springing for the first
driver’s huge, impassive, fleshy countenance.  He has the very face for
myself, with nothing in the world to say, conversing with a man several
was there the place has been destroyed by fire, and has risen again from
the hotel enclosure are the springs from which it takes its name, hot
very idle, very silent but for the breezes and the cattle bells afield.
of lesser hill-tops.
half a dozen flies, a monument of content.
to plunge again into the covert, we had a fine sense of woods, and
proprietor, and another smaller house hard by to serve as a museum, where
he said.  Every penny he makes goes into that ranche to make it
“Who first found the forest?” asked my wife.
And now he had a theory of his own, which I did not quite grasp, except

art of disappointment.

among the sea.  It is not Pan only; Bacchus, too, is dead.
Wine in California is still in the experimental stage; and when you taste

labels, blue, red, or yellow, stamped with crown or coronet, and hailing
expect to prosper.  A basking inclination, and stones, to be a reservoir

impervious.
father putting him inside Mons Meg, and that touched me home; and we
a certain neophite and girlish trepidation, and he followed every sip and
might communicate a flavour, and that romantic cellar influence the
with a Chinaman to cook for them, and who waved their hands to us as we
something like a rival, a man from Barra to be more than half a
Sunday, and the wind squalls, and the salt showers fly and beat.  I do
for instance, in England.  But somehow life is warmer and closer; the
cottage.  It was a Scotchman who had come down a long way from the hills
about fifty, filthy, ragged, roguish, with a chimney-pot hat and a tail

himself scarlet at the pipes.  This is a very sad story.  After he had
PART II—WITH THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL
here in California.
hard by, the whole problem of the squatter’s existence would be solved.
regibus;” and behold it cannot be carried out, unless I find a neighbour
I had no idea, at the time I made his acquaintance, what an important
For some reason, Kelmar always shook his head at the mention of Pine
name had already pleased me; the high station pleased me still more.  I
outing took them, by good fortune, over the border into Lake County.
their bright tin, but I could invent no reason for their presence.  Our
For some two miles we rattled through the valley, skirting the eastern
from the valley.  Thence, looking up and from however far, each fir
valley.  “I to the hills lift mine eyes!”  There are days in a life when
one side, were caught upon the summit by the whole weight of the wind as
about sundown this rude barrier was swung, like a derrick, across the
At last we set forth for Silverado on foot.  Kelmar and his jolly Jew
raised apparently on gingerbread.  He was bent on his own pleasure,
another sign of habitation.  Silverado town had all been carted from the
around, ain’t it?” waving his hand cheerily as though to weave a spell;
red, rocky, and naked overhead, was here walled across by a dump of
treetops and hilltops, and far and near on wild and varied country.  The
stones; a table, a barrel; a plate-rack on the wall; two home-made
doorless doorway opening on the air of heaven, five feet above the
with water, and lit by some stray sun-gleams, whence I know not.  In that
stream brawling by; great elms or chestnuts, humming with bees and nested
After we had got back to the Toll House, the Jews were not long of
go out.  Sometimes the wind would make a sally nearer hand, and send a
of that exact pitch of cheerful irrelevancy to exercise a kindred sway
was ten by the clock before our Jew boys returned to pick us up.  Kelmar,
Take them for all in all, few people have done my heart more good; they
worth while; and Kelmar disappeared into the bar, leaving them under a
and again, to a more trampling measure—
But while I was thus wandering in my fancy, great feats had been
and I had not been faint with hunger.  The ladies each narrated the story
cheque, should deny all knowledge of it—a fear I have myself every time I
smiling.
five dollars, Mr. Stevens,” he said, “but I must give Mr. Kelmar
brother’s mote.
seen a flute, I am sure he could have played upon it by nature.  It may
By noon we had come in sight of the mill: a great brown building,
mountain summit.  It was odd to compare this with the former days, when
through fallen branches and dead trees.  It went straight down that steep
unexplored.
Rufe was not a regular man any way, it seemed; and if he got playing

Silverado rubbish-heap; but what would I not have given to unearth a
my mind a shadowy belief, verging with every moment nearer to certitude,

sun now shot an arrow.  There was the floor, in much the same state as
shaft.
dump, we could see the sun still striking aslant into the wooded nick
greatly revived and comforted by that good creature-fire, which gives us
With so strong a helper, the business was speedily transacted.  Soon the
about nine, as a particular favour, we should have some hay.

continued to grow higher.  It seemed to me much such a wind as we had
pettily thievish, like the English gipsies; rustically ignorant, but with
activity of body and finesse of mind.  By their names ye may know them,
much grave commiseration for his fate.  In all that he said and did, Rufe
always, as she thought, wrongly, but to the more educated eye, always
reticence, no mystery, no manner about the woman: she was a first-class
Breedlove—I think he had crossed the plains in the same caravan with
Caliban I ever knew.
shock hair, the colour of wool; his mouth was a grin; although as strong
her.  If a tree a hundred feet high were to fall a foot a day, how long
more in everybody’s way than any other two people that I ever set my eyes
warmed his heart like sunshine.  Yet he was as cowardly as he was
pattern of Jack Sheppard; but the famous housebreaker, we may be certain,
were boulders to be plucked up bodily, bushes to be uprooted, and other
departed.
lad’s hire, I so imposed upon them with merely affected resolution, that
commercial idealism which puts so high a value on time and money.  Sanity

and earthy vanity.  In towns or the busier country sides, he is roughly
boards had shrunk and separated, flashed suddenly into my eyes as stripes
blown itself out; in the hours that followed not a sigh of wind had
fathoms on fathoms of gray sea vapour, like a cloudy sky—a dull sight for

its progress, one pine tree first growing hazy and then disappearing
flood were beginning to subside.  The old landmarks, by whose
strident sighing mounted to me where I stood.
interest of the scene entirely occupied our minds.  We were set just out


of Mount Saint Helena, until I could look right down upon Silverado, and
air.
croquet ground; the ostler standing by the stable door, chewing a straw;
consumptive; so was Rufe; so was Mr. Jennings, the engineer.  In short,
the nobility particularly meeting him with open arms; and I must say that
alongside of “From Palace to Hovel,” a sixpenny “Ouida” figured.  So
croquet, and the hollow strokes of the mallet sounded far away among the
before the second was abreast of it.  Huge concerns they were,
their momentary presence gauged and divined them, loved and hated; and
shirt-sleeves and all begrimed with dust—and the next minute we were
accustomed corners.  Yet a little, and the ostler would swing round the

from day to day it languished on, with protestations on our part and
high street under the stars, and the China-boy and Kong Sam Kee singing
innumerable millions, stuck boldly forth like lamps.  The milky way was
the appearance of a common night.  Slowly this change proceeded, and
    Till it floods the moon’s pale islet or the morning’s golden shores.”
sky, the hues of the star-fire, and the incredible projection of the
on the platform.  The one tall pine beside the ledge was steeped in

ledge, that great gaping slice out of the mountain shoulder, propped
bounding and thundering down the iron chute.  And now all gone—all fallen
ebbed about the mountain, coming and going, now by lone prospectors, now
expense, the mine was deserted, and the town decamped.  According to the

an adage; and again, and much more probably, as an ordinary Christian
“jump the claim.”
on his inheritance.  However, it was none of my business; all seemed
singularly in abeyance in the case of Ronalds.
“Good evening,” I returned; and then, to put them at their ease, “A stiff
damning significance.  We, the lords of Silverado, had come face to face
moving elsewhere, and Silverado had begun to wither in the branch before
doggrel rhymes and contumelious pictures, and announcing, in terms
uppermost for the pleasure of speaking, and laughed and laughed again as

down this chute, for the rest of the afternoon, they poured one avalanche
barrack.  There he bestowed himself on a box, and unrolled his papers
be necessary,” he said slowly; “just you write it down.”  Perhaps this
and, in the passage, changed its name from the “Mammoth” to the

water behind the door, the stove crackling in a corner, and perhaps the
of forest and rough hilltop; our eyes commanded some of Napa Valley,
upon the platform to wait till it was ready.  Silverado would then be
will.  The little corner near the forge, where we found a refuge under
were to be drawn, the water-carrier left the house along some tilting
entire, and still carrying a truck, which it was Sam’s delight to trundle
mountain bury the scene of our encampment.
concoct enough soil to nourish a few poor grasses.  It is the same, they


rooted in a fathom of black soil.
canyon, among the crags that were printed on the sky.  Now and again, but
alarming; the hum of many insects, and the buzz of the wasp convince the
inconsequence of the natural man, they were no sooner found out than they
there till the next rain in his long slide down the mountain.  There was
north-west of Silverado, spending his summer thereabout, with wife and
accident.  But the kangaroo rat, it proved, was no such unknown animal;
after a life so shadowed and troubled, continually shaken with alarm, and
And now that I have named to the reader all our animals and insects
Indeed, it would be hard to exaggerate the pleasure that we took in the
the coming of the night.
Our nights wore never cold, and they were always still, but for one
cracked house seemed literally bursting with the light.  It shone keen as
office till it had mounted the plank and disappeared again into the
to ‘Prince Otto,’ whom you will remember a very little fellow, no bigger

hand.

boundaries has faded.
a vast plain.  On these sides many small states bordered with the
the sovereign race.
gradients.  The other ran like a fillet across the very forehead of the
the drooping shoulders of the hill and across the expanse of plain.  They
up-looking eye.  And below, the great practicable road was bound for the
it’s begun again; it’s as it was three years ago, before he married; a
for liberty and Gondremark.’
‘Well, if he founders that mare, I’ll never forgive him,’ added the
dark like cypresses, their light was of small service to a traveller in
brain; a surge of temptation, a beat of all his blood, went over him, to
‘You will pardon me,’ said Otto.  ‘I am a traveller and have entirely
gentleman’s horse; and you, sir, condescend to enter.’
horseman.  When he returned, a smoking omelette and some slices of
Mittwalden,’ answered the Prince, weaving in a patch of truth, according
world.  ’Tis twenty years now since I crossed the marshes, for we grow
‘Not what you might call disliked,’ replied the old gentleman, ‘but
upon this River Farm, and wrought in it, day in, day out; I have ploughed
if the prince meets with a reverse, he may have to blame himself for the
and we know some who would shed their blood for him.’
‘Ay,’ said Otto, ‘it has been a long peace—a peace of centuries.’



a good name to live by; he should have got a wife and a blessing on his
idleness and—what most commonly follows it—corruption.  The Princess has
unfortunate Prince, ‘this Otto has himself to thank for these disorders.
asseverated Killian.  ‘Well, sir, that is very sad; it is a sad thing for
public virtue; but when a man has neither, the Lord lighten him!  Even
all their governments, you please to mark my words—the day will come in
‘Give himself out!’ cried Fritz.  ‘He is!  He is to lay by his title as

out-of-doors.  And lastly, sir, it quiets a man down like saying his
shadows.  To one who had passed a miserable night, the freshness of that
flitting shadows fell upon and marbled the surface of that so seething
of man and destiny, and as Otto pored on these recurrent changes, he
and was in a dream.’
no power.’
Fritz is as honest as he.  And as for all they said, it was just talk and
be a soldier.  Now if any one accuses me, I get up and give it them.  O,
cookery that no one could be brought to eat the pudding?  That is me, my
Prince, if you came worrying where I was cooking, I would pin a napkin to
and made her a fine gesture of dismissal.
of envy; but yet there it was: the passion of Ahab for the vineyard, done
place, six score!  But that, sir, is partly the farming.’
here?’ he added, as they turned to go.
and went a-courting.  But here we have no continuing city; and as for the
other feelings.  If all he heard were true, Grünewald was growing very


‘I would not judge them hardly, sir,’ said Otto.  ‘We all have our
your lordship some experience of land?’
palm; she, standing a little way off in blowsy, voluble distress.
what circumstance am I to render you an account of this young lady’s
down.  I ask you a question, I ask it again, and here I stand.’  He drew
‘Ay,’ quoth Mr. Gottesheim, who had been looking on with his hands behind
Civility is civility, but I’ll be no man’s gull.  I have a right to
did I tell you?  I told you I was fighting your battles.  Now you see!
girl’s sake, had not the courage to gainsay him; but he regarded his
tell how far the likeliest kind of man may be prepared to go; and I was
And he looked meltingly upon Otto.


Near the frontier Otto met a detachment of his own troops marching in the
beery yaw in the saddle.  It was clear his bottle was no longer full.
Prince!’ he cried, saluting, with another yaw that came near dismounting
A horrid confusion came over Otto.  He perceived that he had acted
self-possession.  ‘You would not even show me the medal you wear about
‘You are strangely misinformed,’ said Otto.  ‘Conspiracy itself is
The man gurgled in his throat.
conspirator as I to be a king.’
the young men that should be working?  Where is the currency?  All
returned with fresher venom.  And by three in the afternoon, coming to
his work.’
Otto suggested.
which empirics blind themselves and exasperate the ignorant.  The day of
smile, ‘I think I should amuse you if I were to explain my notion of a
astonish you,’ he said.  ‘These are not the ideas of the masses.’
in the saddle and given to half stages.  And to find a convoy to
hill that overlooks Mittwalden.
Princess of Grünewald, was the heroine, Gondremark the hero of this
small stables opened, over a bridge, upon the park.  The yard clock was
‘Dear heart a’ mercy!’ cried the groom.  ‘Who’s that?’
returned, even by the light of the lantern; and his hand trembled as he
side was much older; and here it was almost dark; only a few windows
coming home; the wife was dancing, the husband had been playing a trick
merchants clanking down the hill.
day before.  He was a man of about forty, flaxen-haired, with refined
of morning sun; and Otto looked so gay, and walked so airily, he was so

‘Yes, perhaps.  I would not be dogmatic,’ answered Gotthold.
both daring and prudent; we must all vaunt our pride and go to the stake
money, with this palace, with these guards?  And I—a thief—am to execute
‘Now I wonder in what diseased imagination,’ Gotthold said, ‘that
‘You are not then,’ asked the Prince, ‘an authoritarian?’
to-day?  Do you not know that you are touching, with lay hands, the very
devil with all casuistry! and leave the state to Gondremark, as
too—I hear of war—war in this teapot!  What a complication of absurdity


hoarsely.  ‘I did not believe this girl could care for me; I must not
impressed the beholder with a certain air of frozen dignity and wisdom.
the Herr Doctor,’ said the Chancellor of Grünewald.  ‘Herr Doctor, if you

in your dulness.  I have asked you whether all was quiet; do me the
added.  ‘It consists neither with your dignity nor mine that you should
that, between you and me, all should be done gently; for I have not

Otto thanked his cousin with a look.  ‘Give them to me,’ he said,


called?  To seize the papers of this gentleman, the private papers of a
                         SIR JOHN CRABTREE, BARONET.
Gotthold’s brow darkened, and he looked out of window.
It may well be asked (_it was thus the English traveller began his
he has hair of a ruddy gold, which naturally curls, and his eyes are
is no end to the number of the things that he does, and does badly.  His
stooping.  Her manners, her conversation, which she interlards with
actual design he were a bold man who should offer to decide.  Yet I will
an active policy might double the principality both in population and
sympathies were early acquired, and I would not willingly let fall a word
sure it would be the signal for an instant rising, I was struck dumb with
at court and his popularity among the lodges still endure unbroken.
me with deference, I have been conscious throughout of a sort of
cold and stolid politician possesses to a great degree the art of
a mere blind or buffer for the more important sinner.  A few hours’
mysteries of the human heart.  But the rage of illicit love, when it is


The Gamiani apartment was so called from an Italian doctor who had
have you asked that was not granted as to an honoured guest?  And here,
large debt of gratitude.  And to conclude, as I have not yet finished my
Chancellor had finished his piece of prestidigitation, and, without

Sir John regarded Otto with an approving twinkle; then he bowed, but
through the echoing stairway of the tower, and out through the grating,
a wager.
vulgar scandal, and propose to print it in a public book!  Such is your
would make no change.  I cannot draw upon a reigning sovereign.’

‘Nay,’ cried the traveller, ‘very likely.  I am one who goes sniffing; I
‘And now, sir,’ added Otto, ‘there is the Pheasant House; close behind it
all open courses; and now that I have seen you act with so much spirit, I
‘Nay, your Highness, I pray you to forget what I had written,’ said Sir
popular; and while a maid of honour made her exit by a side door to
am a bad actor.’
and idle chatter pleased him to the marrow.
‘For the pleasure of the return,’ said Otto.  ‘I am like a dog; I must
beautiful in repose, lightened and changed, flashed into smiles, and

drawn away, for it was understood that Madame von Rosen was in favour
‘You must be right, madam,’ replied the Prince.  ‘For six years that we
‘It is a dull trade,’ said Otto.
politics.  Do you know? this war is popular—popular to the length of
it true that you have no ambition?  There was a man once in England whom
‘Precisely,’ said the Countess; and she pointed with her fan to the door
My bear is jealous!’

altogether to manlike ambition and the desire of power, the eyes were by
be calumnious to call deceit.  His manners, as he smiled upon the
‘What can have brought him?’ she cried.  ‘To-day of all days?’

It is in herself—her heart is soft.’
‘The courage, madam, is diplomatic,’ he replied.  ‘We take a grave step;
These singular views of history, strictly _ad usum Seraphinæ_, did not
Vienna, the whole family, have patted us on the head and sent us forward.

this?  It is what my Princess pointed out to me herself; it was by these
receive him now?  And what are we to do if he should appear at the
it were, a grateful repose from dry considerations.  Does my Princess
concluded Gondremark, resuming his own voice, ‘our sovereign, by the
horns.’
gave the order to admit the Prince.
delicacy, he still forced on her attention, she divined the grossness of
somewhat sharply that he dismissed the attendant who had brought him in.
sides, you must bear in mind how I have acted.  When I found it amused
fancy is this?  Go, flirt with the maids and be a prince in Dresden

another happiness.  Happy, yes; I am happy if you like; but I will tell
‘I am sure I cannot tell,’ she said, like an automaton.
what your love refuses I would scorn to receive from your pity.  I do not
myself open that I might speak without offence.  And now that I have



take long—and it is the last obligation that you shall have the chance to


‘I have now,’ continued Otto, ‘given you your liberty complete.  This has

As soon as they were gone, and Otto knew the length and breadth of his
across the tenderest of his feeling, and sent a string of her
                                                                 G. v. H.’
CHAPTER VII—THE PRINCE DISSOLVES THE COUNCIL
surprise of all, Gotthold.  He had been named a privy councillor by Otto,

sign?’

bearing, entered the apartment.  It was like oil upon the troubled


Grafinski, although I am convinced he is clear of the intention of
side-table, ‘Mr. Secretary,’ he added, ‘bring me, if you please, the
the present point of time it would be morally impossible to divert a
‘We are,’ said Seraphina.


Highness proposes would be to stultify the whole previous policy of
reason to be aware that yours is the more authoritative information.’
admiration.  I had not heretofore done justice to your qualities.’


nervously tapping on the floor, she had kept her own counsel and

choked—‘then you return—for a forenoon—to ruin all!  To-morrow, you will
whisperings!’
secretaries, just at the moment when the Princess’s ladies, summoned in
‘Ah,’ she said, ‘he was born to torture me!  O what a fall, what a


twin children.  All of my life until we met was petty and groping; was it
fortitude!  You know that these are not the words of flattery; your
and recently insulted,’ said the Baron.  ‘Look into your intellect, and
‘I read your fancy,’ she returned.  ‘It is mere madness, midsummer
conquered his emotion and resumed: ‘But you, madam, conceive more
power must use it; it lies hard upon your conscience.’
it, you have solved our problem.’
the captaincy to the Scotsman Gordon; he at least will have no scruple.
‘It would appear so,’ she said, with a flash of her occasional repugnance

stript from Seraphina.  It was more than an insult; it was a public

affront.  Anything that shook my credit might hamper us in the immediate
conduct, have remembered all that was true, forgotten all that was unjust
worked, and worked wisely and well, over the hated details of his
‘O, that!  O yes,’ returned Otto; but for all his carelessness, his
she was currently contrasted, remained an open secret.  But this stiff
fell from him like rain, and he re-awoke to the poetic facts of life.
gambled.  It was towards this point that Otto moved, not ostentatiously,

‘I wish you so well,’ she said, ‘that I dare not tell it you.’
and if there were more to-morrow, I should not sleep till I had broken
concluding with a few practical words as to the treasury windows, and the
money of my own.’

‘Madam, in everything you are to command; you shall be captain, I am but

corn sack—empty this time—and to accompany me.  We shall be gone all
tiptoe in the twilight of the stars.  The night was warm and windless.  A
by his own neglect.  And he now proposed to embarrass the finances of
a companion certain to be less virtuous than oneself!

never cared for virtue till I fell in love with my Prince.’  She laughed
tell, I will make a clean breast.  It is done already.  I have robbed the
friend who loves you!’
clasping him; then she found his hand and covered it with kisses, and at

interest.  ‘No,’ he said, ‘I am no ingrate.’


Good-night!’
have been set right makes but a double trial for man’s vanity.  The
When he reached the fountain, he did, out of ill-humour and parade, an
and the landlord of the inn were called to serve as witnesses.  The

blessed; and whatever, sir, may be your happiness and triumph in that
‘It is what I fear,’ returned the Doctor.
you lack the stamina, the habit, the restraint, the patience.  Your wife


‘She is the best friend I have, and I choose that she shall be
‘Ah!’ cried Gotthold, ‘look at your wife and blush!  There’s a wife for a
Reach me my Anatomy!’
children that reward them; and their very friends should seek repose in
open.  If you go on as you have started, disgrace this fellow Gondremark,

in the hour of our country’s need—doubtless to be ready for the
‘When have you ever known me use my power in any private animosity?’
‘Herr von Hohenstockwitz, I have ceased to invite your aid in my
left alone with the most conflicting sentiments of sorrow, remorse, and

a little door with a key, mounted a flight of stairs, and entered
‘Hey!’ he cried.  ‘At last!’
The Baron again laughed loud and long, for in his shirt-sleeves he was a
morning he will command a most romantic prospect from the donjon of the


‘Jealousy!’ cried Gondremark.  ‘Anna, I would never have believed it!
me.  Am I likely to care for such a preciosa?  ’Tis hard that we should
midnight, did you say?  It is Gordon, I see, that you have charged with
‘Heinrich,’ she returned, looking him in the face, ‘take care.  I will
his servants when he goes a-hunting: a child could read the truth.  No,
wheels.’

‘No more,’ she interrupted, ‘Do not spoil your attitude.  And now since
CHAPTER XII—PROVIDENCE VON ROSEN: ACT THE SECOND
‘That will do,’ she said.  ‘Bid my carriage follow me to the palace.  In

child was seated on her knee, thumbing and glowering at her watch.

fate, a providence—and have no guess upon which side I shall declare
Frau Gräfin von Rosen.


that I have read this paper, and the last of a fool’s paradise is



I be more in place? or whose fault is it but mine?  You speak, Madame von
Madame von Rosen broke into sudden laughter.  ‘Fool,’ she cried, ‘I am in
‘Alas! madam,’ cried the Prince, ‘and your unlucky money!  I did amiss to

but time to leave a letter for the Princess.’
a cavalier,’ he added, with a smiling gallantry.
the name of love, and calling his wrath forgiveness; then he cast but one
‘Well, I forgive her,’ he said.  ‘If it be of any use to her, I forgive.’
have the honour of following your Highness?’


still air of the night, and passed speedily farther and fainter into

a rose of anger in her face, ‘who sent you here, and for what purpose?
you.’
person, as you know—or if you do not, then I have the pleasure of
‘Not mad,’ returned von Rosen.  ‘Sane enough to know you dare not break
Rosen is a better women than you, my Princess, though you will never have
The Princess spoke with some distress.  ‘Your violence shocks me and

one who is called my lover, and if it pleases you to use the power I now
‘I cannot look at it till you have,’ returned Seraphina, very seriously.
‘Command yourself, madam,’ said the Countess, watching with some alarm
‘This information reaches me,’ she said, ‘when I have need of it.  I

will leave me.’
using her for his own ends, the step was wide and the descent giddy.
door, ‘Stay!’ she added.  ‘As soon as Baron Gondremark arrives, let him

                                                                    OTTO.’
she would escape.  From that world-wide theatre of nodding heads and
firm-footed, radiant with anger, waiting for the foe.
knew, would wound you when we came to this distasteful but most necessary
‘It has come,’ thought Gondremark.  ‘You, madam!’ he cried, starting
She heard him with wonder, rage, and then contempt.  His words offended


Rosen with his latest breath; ah! who would call on Seraphina?  She had
‘Nothing,’ replied Seraphina ‘I desire to speak with you.  Send off the
dear madam,’ he broke out again, ‘in the name of all that is practical,
With the greatest compunction, the Chancellor drew near; and as he did so

‘Madam,’ cried the Chancellor, ‘if this most melancholy sight were seen
She measured the depth of her abasement steadily.  ‘Take whom you must,’

crossed the parade, and began to thread the glittering alley: the
the passing bustle in the Palace had already reached and re-echoed in the
And yet now he stumbled, the master passion, fear, betraying him.  He was
lingered, ‘I bid you go,’ she added.  ‘Save yourself.’
The porter, drawn by the growing turmoil, had vanished from the postern,
forth into the woods, a ragged Cinderella.
great night laid hold upon her; her eyes shone with stars; she dipped her
porches of her ear, memory re-enacted the tumult of the evening: the
began to yearn for the grasp of kindness.
passage through the silence spread and echoed, and filled the night with
eddy of a brook, and leaning with one hand on the rock from which it
now she looked up the hill and saw the brook coming down to her in a
insensibly to change; the grass too, short as it was, and the whole
fairly ran in the dim alleys.  As she ran, her ears were aware of many
its first long breath, steady and chill; and for leagues around the woods
breath that had quickened and encouraged the baby flames; and now, as the
outspread pine was already glorious with day; and here and there, through
glittering in her ears; and with the movement of her coming, one small
hearth, twigs and a few dry branches burned with the brisk sounds and all
before, she had not tasted of gross food nor drunk after another; but a
Yet her heart trembled, for she saw his hand stretched forth as if to

hued and scented, they were so beset and canopied by the dome of the blue

the heart.

to her Father’s arms.  And there in the meanwhile her body lay exposed by
plain the traveller had far outstripped his carriage.
‘Upon my word,’ he thought, ‘I did not think the girl could be so pretty.
‘At your Highness’s disposal,’ he replied.
‘And the Prince,’ she asked, ‘is anything known of him?’
‘I do not care,’ she said.  ‘I thought I saw it burning.’
of his chaise with welcome, and, by way of saying something, proposed
admirer.’
bits of scandal on the spot.  That is one of the little favours, madam,
You say that you admire my husband: in his name, be honest.’
world, I am as true a wife as ever stood.’
good husband to concern myself no more with your affairs; and I assure
once thought of your husband, instead of singly thinking of yourself, you
‘I think you do unwisely,’ he replied.  ‘Continue, if you please, to use
pine-trees overhung it from above; far below the blue plains lay forth
And now she had matter for concern indeed.  Her interview with Otto,
air.
course, in an invidious character; but I am a man of taste, fond of books
‘Colonel Gordon,’ said the Prince, ‘oblige me so far, and set me right
grace: and I now propose to offer them.’  So saying, the Colonel lighted
All was bright within; the wine had coloured Gotthold’s cheek; dim forms
words and your suspicions rankle; and not yours alone.  It is idle,
‘How, sir?  You never did anything wrong? and I heard you asking pardon
‘Pardon me, Colonel,’ said the Prince; ‘I readily acquit you of any
one.  My father, the Reverend Alexander Gordon, was a good man, and
‘And a strange guardian,’ said the Prince.  ‘Yet what he said was true.’
industry, your keen mind, your books—serving mankind, scorning pleasures
‘There is no best in man,’ said Gotthold.  ‘I am not better, it is likely
me? and so you can forgive your wife?  Why, then, we may bid conscience
above them, on a bold projection of the mountain, and planting its bulk
CHAPTER III—PROVIDENCE VON ROSEN: ACT THE LAST
entrance to the Palace avenue, but feigning not to observe him; and as
in a riding-habit and a flapping hat, draw bridle at the gate of the
arm.
the finest woman, with, begad, the finest eyes in Grünewald.  I never saw
out her fine voice in ‘Lascia ch’io pianga’; and when she had reached the
‘Poor child,’ she said, ‘poor child!  Sit down beside me here, and tell
not give to have resisted?  What would I not give for freedom?’
me.  Be generous.’
beyond her.  ‘Ingrate!’ she cried; ‘I wrung it from her, I betrayed my

points me, duty still neglected by this Featherhead.  But do not fear to
papers, ‘but overwhelmed in debt.’
left lamenting.  The Doctor still remains to me: _probus_, _doctus_,
thank you, besides, for some philosophy, of which I stood in need.  I
are gone.  Open your grudging portals.’
his enthusiasm mounted.  ‘I declare,’ he cried at last, with the air of
rock was turned, and the Felsenburg concealed behind its bulk, the lady
angle, where a thin stream sprayed across a boulder and was scattered in
‘Wounded and suffering acutely,’ said Sir John.  ‘His groans—’
‘A most impulsive lady!’ said Sir John.  ‘Who would have thought she

innocence of a child.  So, when at length he turned a corner and beheld
‘All!’ she went on, ‘I have ruined all!  But, Otto, in kindness you must
together, as poor as Job and merely a man and a woman—let me conjure you
own to which I will conduct you.  Otto the Prince being down, we must try
The burn kept growing both in force and volume; at every leap it fell
I presumed upon these pitiful concessions.’
I was wrong.  I give you the news, and bid you to Mittwalden.  My throne
me?  Why, sir, I make sure there is not a man in Grünewald would lay
not suppose,’ he said, as he filled them, ‘that I am an habitual drinker.
‘But some have to be taught so,’ she replied.
‘Lead on,’ she said.  ‘Are you not Otto the Hunter?’
and away in the distance into fainting whispers.  Nearer hand, a bird out
you.  I understand how the brave woman must look down on the weak man.  I
yourself—and me.’
tenderness and anguish; on her features, and most of all in her changed
my superior, but still cold, like ice.  And again I dreamed, and thought

chapter on Grünewald was torn by the hand of the author in the palace
presentation copy, obtained for me by Mr. Bain in the Haymarket; and the
Gondremark; that name appears twice at least in Victor Hugo’s
grasp of circumstance and force of thought—in short, just Buttonhole’s


and raged at it.  He knew there was a vast world outside, to whom

Randolph Crescent; full of a sort of blundering affection, full of
was gall to Mr. Nicholson; it took his son from the house, and he was a
thrill of easterly wind that tossed the flags along that terrace of
‘You’ve come to the right shop, haven’t you?’ returned John.  ‘I have
Whereupon John went forth, and pawned his gold watch under the assumed
of admiration.
crushing sense of inferiority.
could get a much better supper at the same hour, and lose not a jot in
greatly daring, accepted it.  As he walked home, the thoughts of this
CHAPTER II—IN WHICH JOHN REAPS THE WHIRLWIND
ironical smile.  John had read the significance of that smile, which
He proceeded slowly back along the terrace in a tender glow; and when he

get it, and at the same moment both men ran in and closed with him.
interview with Mr. Nicholson, from which John now shrunk in imagination
engaged on a coarse meal, and in the company of several tipsy members of

The vague terror of public opinion weighed generally on them all; but
well from them.  Each, moreover, was in an odd state of destitution.  Not
from the groves of the town gardens, went each his own way with bowed

mess of it,’ he broke out, and turned to the window.
‘Robbed?  Be careful what you say, John!’
Mr. Nicholson drew in his breath.
worse behind.

have forgotten all decency and all natural feeling, and actually

‘Well,’ said the old gentleman, at last, ‘I cannot pretend not to be
Whether his father spoke, or whether he remained long in the room or at
more speaking signs, the service had not long begun; and the unhappy
in the same direction.
the hope; and rising to his new situation, he wrote, sitting in his
father had once returned from church, on some slight illness, in the
homeless places and with godless people.
starved; how he was at last taken up by charitable folk, restored to some
perform the simple artifice of pea and thimble: for their own profit,
visit to a dive with a month’s wages in his pocket—an act of such
piety—months and years had gone by, and John had never written.  The
familiarity with the great American joke, and a certain likeness to a
chanced, in conformity with human nature, that out of all this business

Sacramento.  There, under the impenetrable _alias_ of the number of his
the fortnight was finally at an end, and the time had come for John to
had long regarded his son as one dead; John’s place had been taken, the
embezzled large sums, he must lie on his bed as he has made it.’  And
presently he could enter his father’s house by means of the pass-key,
old acquaintance; the names of friends on door-plates; the sight of
for him in old days by an aunt.  The door was opened (to his surprise)
And the old butler removed his defences, remarking only ‘I thocht ye were
he dammed down.
inward.  For a moment, as he stood under the doors of that estranged
into a valued friend of Mr. Nicholson’s, and to have remained, upon the
way.
‘So you’re home again?’ said Beatson.  ‘Where have you been all this long
John home again, and Beatson—Old Beatson—did not care a rush.  He
the fires and the gas had been lighted, and the meals spread, at the
mines, and crowded marts and mingled races of San Francisco, and his own
room, opened it, and entered.  Mr. Nicholson sat in the same place and
‘Understand me,’ interrupted Mr. Nicholson; ‘you are no son of mine; and
squalls of anger and lulls of sick collapse, in what pacing of streets
of Howard Place (whither he had somehow wandered) he pledged his own


former days, defied the climbing schoolboy.  The lamp of the cab threw a
interest that well became his port-wine face; and when John had told him
door, ‘Who are you, and what do you want?’
to and fro like a veil on Alan’s features, and sent his shadow hovering

in.  I’ll go right away to bed if you have anything to do.  I seem to
then, once more, abstraction seemed to fall upon him, and he stood with
bare skin.  Even in his bemused intelligence, wonder began to awake.
me when you know.’
found it partly empty.  Three or four glasses were gone.  Alan must have
When John awoke it was day.  The low winter sun was already in the
yet, even now, where else was he to turn?
And that reminded him: why was he alone? and where was Alan?  The thought
(perhaps audible rather to the ear of the spirit than to the ear of the
in.
By this, John had his hand upon the shutters, and flinging them back,

Terrace; possibly another; some one at least: a human soul, whom it was
But in hours of trial the junto of man’s nature is dissolved, and anarchy
He must go, leave the house unguarded, find a cab, and return—return
an effort from the ground, and with a rush of relief, came forth again
But there was to be no remission of the strokes of fate.  As he thus sat,
passenger was stirring.  Plainly it was, now or never, the high tide of

friendly talk, commenting on the weather, on the sacred season, which
then.  Business first, and pleasure afterward.’
device), help John with the portmanteau, and enliven matters with a flow
the railway terminus at Waverley Bridge.  During the transit, he sat with

returning with the receipt.
‘It’s only a halfpenny!’ he said, startled out of railway decency.
shillin’ on a day like this than put him off with a derision like a

‘Let us have no more of this,’ said he, his foot once more upon the step.
unconsciousness, the driver on the box digesting his rebuke and his
aside his horse to the right.

return, and drive off at last down-hill, along the curve of Lynedoch
The thought stirred his imagination, which began to manufacture many
the manlier part; how he despised himself that he had fled that fatal

rapping on the front glass.  John let it down, and beheld the port-wine
way?’
was the ruling passion; and though there was some good nature, some
shock stopped him, and he faced once more toward the cab.  The driver was

there, like a mortified tramp, and shaken his fist and vented his gall
the air of the afternoon began to be vocal with those strange and dismal
Suppose he went to the public-house close by at Blackhall, and offered
of cow browning and smoking on a skewer of wood; how warm it was, how
self, cheerful, regular, not unthrifty, we have seen nothing; and it may
wood, beating among young trees; and then he was aware of a house with
His next conscious moment was on the Dean Bridge; but whether he was John
The clock uttered its premonitory catch; in five minutes Christmas-day
courage and good sense; and as John blinked back at her, a faint

finishing establishment in Moray Place, she left John alone in his
it with compressed lips.  She was lost in none of those questionings of


habit, partly to be of some service in the world; partly, it might be,
remained in his, compliant.  A voice told him this was Flora, after
run away again?  I thought you had enough of that.’



‘Three hundred?’ repeated John.  ‘Three hundred pounds, you mean?  That’s
you John, you stick down the address of your bank manager.  You, Flora,
John murmured inarticulate thanks.  To see his brother thus energetic in
I contracted one or two.’
and with surprising quickness broke into his father’s drawer.
CHAPTER IX—IN WHICH MR. NICHOLSON ACCEPTS THE PRINCIPLE OF AN ALLOWANCE
old chest of drawers; there were the chairs—one, two, three—three as
and shivered in a dressing-gown.  And before that I had been to the High
it.  Is your watch right?  Well, you have a quarter of an hour.  By five

‘I was afraid you would notice it,’ observed his son; ‘it made such a
to-night.  There appears to be no doubt, sir, that John has been
‘I do not see that I have much to gain in bringing back my elder
for the expression was not new to him.  ‘I have never grudged you money
‘I forgot to lock the door, it seems,’ replied Alexander.
was like the man with the cart of apples—this was beyond him!  That
all, a Nicholson—it should certainly be righted.
large, portly, whiskered man of a very comfortable and respectable air,
‘Hum!’ said Mr. Nicholson, and put his hand, limp and dead, into John’s.

said he; ‘you can stay and amuse your brother, and I think it would be
insults; and beyond this, the cause and details of the tragedy were lost.
Durie posted on the hearthrug in the guise of Hymen’s priest.

disreputable vices, were all things of course in Debenham.  He had some
his bedside.  It was the first time that such a thing had happened in
over, now staring mazily around him; but at the last word he seemed to
‘Do you know him, Doctor?’ asked the undertaker, with a gasp.
deductions.’

his arm a comfortable driving-coat of fur.  There was no doubt but he
in a startled whisper, ‘Fettes!’ he said, ‘You!’
lying where I cast it in the rain.’

The great rich London doctor cried out aloud with a sharp, throttling
‘See if you can hold your tongues,’ said he.  ‘That man Macfarlane is not
with the great London doctor.  It is no great boast, but I believe I was
while the mob that applauded at the execution of Burke called loudly for
the premises and the conduct of the other students, and it was a part of
Few lads could have been more insensible to the impressions of a life
The supply of subjects was a continual trouble to him as well as to his
hang-dog, abominable looks of the ruffians who came to him before the
ghouls had come later than usual, and they seemed more than usually eager

serious a business, and at last, in sore perplexity, determined to wait
On that particular morning Macfarlane arrived somewhat earlier than his
‘We’ll hope not,’ said Macfarlane, ‘and if anybody does—well, you didn’t,
‘And proof another.  Yes, I know; and I’m as sorry as you are this should
features gave a promise of intellect and refinement which was but feebly

Macfarlane to settle the bill.  It was late before they separated; the
packages with which he was so well acquainted.
Fettes was staggered; strange doubts assailed him.  He looked from the
behind and laid his hand gently but firmly on the other’s shoulder.
another case like Jane Galbraith’s.  The more things are wrong the more
second.  Enter the payment in your book, and then you for your part may
borrow, don’t lend.’
‘My God!’ he cried, ‘but what have I done? and when did I begin?  To be
School boy at a farce.’
rang Fettes trembled with exultation to perceive how far they had already
plume himself upon his courage, and had so arranged the story in his mind
then, as now, upon a cross road, out of call of human habitations, and
attracted by the ease and safety of the task.  To bodies that had been
crack of doom; her innocent and almost venerable members to be exposed to
work that lay before them, added zest to their enjoyment of the meal.

like you and me, despise them.  Here’s to the memory of Gray!’
it became necessary to kindle a match and re-illumine one of the lanterns
collision with the trees.  A stone or two, which it had dislodged in its
They had both been wetted to the skin during their operations, and now,
some nameless change had befallen the dead body, and that it was in fear
thing they had along with them.  The rain had moulded the rough sacking


living look in some one’s eye, a passionate gesture, a meaning and
some noble method of our own or some nobility of mien or nature in the
greatness of colonial governors and judges.  In those days he had been
contrived to render in the course of six-and-thirty hours.  He occupied a
breakfast on an art-student of nineteen, a fallen Don Juan who had

my business; it’s a pleasure.  Life is my business—life—this great city,
he indicated that he was no precision, but in his wildest times had never
will allow me?—when you know Paris as I do, you will have seen Strange
expected, and he may find things quite as strange without the expense of
So _blasé_!  Such a charming companion!  Let me see you home.’
departed with a tremor of indignation.  After that they two not
gentleman made the speech of the evening, and then fell below the table,
upright, hot-tempered, hot-headed old gentlemen in England.  Florid, with
and declare that black was white, and blue yellow, with much conviction
stables.  Only,’ he would add, ‘bear this in mind, and do remember that a
every demerit of party letters in general; it was expressed with the
Dick, who had heard nothing of the matter, was up first on that
say)—
with a convenient staff, rode off at once to Thymebury.
but one question to put to you, sir,’ he resumed.  ‘Granted that my
fair play came upper-most in his heart, and murmuring ‘Good morning,’ he
‘Yes, I have read it,’ replied Richard, looking at his foot.
‘That is a suggestion which should have come from me, sir,’ roared the
Have you no loyalty, no spring, no natural affections?  Are you
THERE was no return to the subject.  Dick and his father were henceforth
of this familiar valley, where every corner had its legend, and he was
foot of the knoll sent up a miniature streamlet which meandered in the
‘I beg your pardon,’ he said, taking off his hat, ‘you are sketching.’
‘Indeed, I might give you a hint,’ said Dick.  ‘Although no artist
contented noble-minded pride, ‘why it is I do not choose to show my
She laughed aloud.  ‘Nice?’ she repeated.  ‘I see you don’t care much for

help her to false ideas, while yet not plainly stating falsehoods?  Well,
house, and come he shall,’ she said; and with that she walked off to her
‘My father’s name,’ she said, ‘has made you very welcome.’

different scansion, as Richard, who had not much taste for such a

nor knew the precise site of the studio in which it was being vigorously
and then, and with a willing listener there is no limit to the domain of
deceived so grossly after all; and then if a fraud, was not the fraud
day before.  Dick took her in his arms, and their lips were set together
following led them through a wood of pine-trees carpeted with heather and
shrink from; if it were possible, I should not tell you even now.  My

know what it is to be treated with daily want of comprehension and daily
understand me, and he can’t be made to.’
opened with a clang, and then Mr. Naseby appeared, with stooping
words, and the cold shoulder, he beat off all advances, and entrenched
was so beautiful a day that he was loth to forecast evil, yet something
ill.

‘Sit down,’ continued the parasite, setting the example.  ‘Fortune has
‘I knew you would be,’ she replied; ‘I told him how you loved him.’
people that they cannot contain themselves for happiness.  It would be
Naseby—’
me; my nature and that of the duenna are poles asunder—poles!  But, now
‘Before our walk?’ she cried.  ‘Never!  I must have my walk.’
lady-killer clung to him; and Esther had already thrown on her hat, and
reached the top of the hill towards the first hour of evening; the sun
hopeful and thirsty.
so very near my own home, and my first thought is my neighbours.  I shall
She was too happy to be curious; and his silence, in presence of the
cannot enjoy your pleasures?  Esther, I do.  If I am uneasy, if I am
into his heart and find it written with the same language as her own; she
opened her mouth upon this trying passage of her life, and as for the
Yet it was during this obscure period that the drama was really
to display her offerings to her father.  Van Tromp’s countenance fell
not be jealous of your art, and I will try to understand it.’
it.  And as for the pigments, well, I’ll use them, some of these days;
excursions, and at the thought that the reprobate must get his pocket


and not another.  This very night I will sound her affections.’
prospects, and he fought hard.  Once there came a glimmer of hope.  The

shame; but when dinner was over at Naseby House, and the Squire had gone
and moist; his jowl hung over his shirt collar, his smile was loose and
in what I call _the_ stage, and all I desire is a listener, although he
St. Paul; and anon, complete his own portrait with one of those touches


by his countenance to have lived too long in a world unworthy of him; but
repeated.

soon as that ceased heavy and uncertain footfalls crossed the parlour and
inch in height along the bottom of the glass, and the whole parlour was

CHAPTER VII—THE ELOPEMENT



the truth; and I tell you again, the thing’s absurd, and wrong, and
Then, being made bold by her violence, he took her firmly, almost

Thyme, the babble of the stream rose into the air like a perennial
the clear, brown pool, and swift, transient snowdrift of the rapids.
wooing her with his eves.
before the door was beating flour from his hands as he whistled a
truth, he carried the hand-bag like a talisman, and either stood

arm round her waist, he sought to kiss her lips, not like a lover indeed,

propriety for Dick and Esther.
forgive me?  Esther, you loved me once—can you not love me still?’
‘Is that your last word, Esther?’ said he, very white, and biting his lip
never hear from him again.’
She had put her hand into her pocket and withdrawn it empty.
when he returned suffered herself to be put back into the phaeton, and
averted looks.  He had lost his love, he thought—he had lost his love for

keeping; yet Dick thought he touched his hat to him with something of a
the man until the whole was out.  It appeared from this report that Dick
the first, and was now cowed by the effect of his communications on the
speech to other shoulders, suggested that perhaps the master had better
affections to steady him.  His father was no society for him; he must go
followed, nursing grief, anxiety, and indignation in his heart.
before the cottage and come striding through the garden, concluded
notice of the proffered hand.
But nothing was of avail against the Squire.
understand what brings me here.’
with your son?  My daughter is out, for the matter of that; I might ask
father.’
base insinuations, and I despise them and you.  You were, I am told, a
introduced Esther with ceremonious gallantry, and stood forward and
And he fawned upon Dick with his hands.

a—’
you have been the death of me.  You may boast of that.  Now I leave you.
Esther by the hand, looking at her mournfully.
He relinquished her hand, still looking at her, and she turned to leave
And yet I believe I am as much cut up as you are.  I was born to see
‘Now,’ said Dick, ‘I must go.’
once more to interrupt himself.  ‘The fact is, Admiral,’ he came out with
‘I behave to that girl, sir, like an archdeacon,’ replied Van Tromp
own way; I was her father.  Besides I had taken quite a liking to the

‘I have to ask pardon for this intrusion, Mr. Naseby,’ he said; ‘but I
‘No, sir; to mention a circumstance.  On the morning in question, your

was said, and the Squire nursed him like the proverbial woman.  Rumour,
visitor with more surprise than favour.
will pardon a few rough words to an old man who asks forgiveness from his
you my compliments, Mr. Naseby.’


of children followed cheering.  The _Cigarette_ went off in a splash and
duration; and in five minutes you will not be surprised to learn that I
themselves in the future prevents mankind from trumpeting this cheerful
free when we began to sight the brickyards of Boom, lying for a long way
colder, with an empty bird-cage and a tricolour subscription box by way
the Scots phrase) barnacled.
body and soul with the women; and after a well-married couple, there is
my heart beat at the thought of this one.  ’Tis to fail in life, but to
of the boats under each stroke of the paddles, supported us through this
dinner, and a handful of children.  These barges were all tied one behind
aqueduct, sailing through the green corn-lands: the most picturesque of
He may take his afternoon walk in some foreign country on the banks of
compatible with the return of bed-time or the dinner-hour.  It is not
several burnt fingers of the party.  But the solid quantity of cookery
in the locker of the _Cigarette_.
indifferent, like pieces of dead nature.  They did not move any more than
had in the neighbourhood.  Nothing for it but to lay the sails aside and

not very clearly defined by him, but hopefully construed by his hearers.
cordially greeted by English Protestants when they came across the
‘We number two hundred.’
_voyez-vous_, _nous sommes sérieux_.’
age, the bear’s hug of custom gradually squeezing the life out of a man’s
fooling among boats?  He must have never seen a boat, or never seen an
I venture to doubt whether he will be near so nice a fellow, and whether
the question, and then breasted once more into the swelling tide of his
Nautical Sportsman.  And if we would only wait until the Sunday, this
scruples; we seemed to feel the hot breath of the champion on our necks.
children.
general incredulity.  He is a born British subject, yet he has never
Nobody else was asked for his papers on the way to Maubeuge; but I was;
besides, as I suppose each belligerent nation has a plan of the other’s
colonel with his three medals goes by to the _café_ at night; the troops
externals are as dead to us as so many formalities, and speak a dead
then I drive back again to the hotel.  And so on every day and all the
who likes it not, to keep those who would like it dearly out of this

stretch of blighted country, sparsely covered with brush, but handsomely
the good people reject your money as if you had been trying to corrupt a
hedges were of great height, woven about the trunks of hedgerow elms; and

waters.  I do not affect fishes unless when cooked in sauce; whereas an
experience at home, that I would sooner meet many wild animals than a
far way from here—_bien loin d’ici_.’
cases of advanced sensibility.
One thing in my outfit, however, tickled them out of all politeness; and
how they were to be seen all over the district, and at the larger farms
circle at once widened round us, and our offers of reward were received

I never saw the _Cigarette_ in such an idyllic frame of mind.  He waxed
the bottom an iron letter-box.
It began to grow dark in earnest.  We could no longer distinguish the
Painting, and a copy of the law against public drunkenness.  On one side,
how our best politeness and best efforts at entertainment seemed to fit
You see what it is to be a gentleman—I beg your pardon, what it is to be
other people live more poorly than yourself, but it is not agreeable—I
camping out in life, sees it as it is, and knows that every mouthful he
THE TRAVELLING MERCHANT
and something the look of a horse-jockey.  He had evidently prospered
in creation.  And as for being a reigning prince—indeed I never saw one
before he turns away.  He was at that time absorbed in the galette.  His
All the time of supper, there was nothing spoken of but my young lord.
school-time which must inevitably follow after.  She showed, with a pride
higher tone with the world; but that was explicable on the ground of his

kisses: his mother smiling, no one better pleased than she.

I wonder, by-the-bye, what they call Waterloo crackers in France; perhaps
The good folk of the inn at Pont, when we called there for the bags, were
river-side, drooping its boughs into the water, and piling them up aloft
varies with the hour of the day, not in strength merely, but in
up about their knees: a whole forest, healthy and beautiful, giving
heart grew weary of such fitful, scolding weather.  It was odd how the
farther; and sat in a drift of rain by the side of the bank, to have a
marched of, waggling his head.
treated me like a brute beast at the lock.’
my heart like sunshine.  There was an English fruiterer at dinner,
of that military hero, we bore the associations of the spot with
among strong towns.

Not long after the drums had passed the _café_, the _Cigarette_ and the
the credit of Landrecies, said he; and although we knew very well how
bottle, ‘I do not give it you as my worst,’ said he.  I wonder when
unguarded moments, rather like to be thought a bit of a rogue with the
SAMBRE AND OISE CANAL: CANAL BOATS
men fished over the gunwale, some of them under umbrellas; women did
impromptu hamlet would separate, house by house, to the four winds.  The
melting music under the stars; or perhaps, laying that aside, upraise his
a side shot at your better fortune.  Now, what I like so much in France
state.  They understood perfectly well, they told me, how Monsieur envied
explained.  Fine birds were so dear.  They had sought to get a
long as he boasts of what he really has, I believe they would do it more

‘That’s it,’ assented the husband.  ‘He had his wife and family with him,
cart at Étreux: and we were soon following them along the side of a

its clear and catholic looks.  The shadows lay as solid on the swift
played upon their forefathers; and so, by the hands of his river, he
veins and arteries, and in and out of the heart, as if circulation were
journey, he will have a bottle of the best in every inn, and look upon
ourselves on shore.  And so in a green meadow we bestowed our limbs on
in the air he played; and we thought we had never heard bells speak so
collections, and had their names repeatedly printed in the local paper,
usually involved more than another in its fall.
stone-cast.  I had my backboard down in a trice, and aimed for a place
were of a grave and almost sombre character, but I still clung to my
moment, there was a clear way round the tree-top at the farther side.  He
had leaped out against me, in this green valley quickened by a running

pathetic in the love of the French people, since the war, for dismal
the cross of my existence; I cannot think of Farmer George without
victory, but of death.  There was a number in the hawker’s collection
cause.  One feels as if one would like to trust Déroulède with something.
to speak of, and a strong country accent.  Quite the pick of Origny, I
‘I thank you for the word, mademoiselle,’ said I.  ‘All the more since
like a book is to give in one’s resignation to society.
and so we told them not before twelve, and mentally determined to be off

steady for a kite; and as it was dark, it could not be a star.  For
to land somewhere in that blue uneven distance, into which the roadway
THE COMPANY AT TABLE
exploits, produced a feeling of disproportion in the world, as when a
lived in vain.  I never knew a man so little, for whom yet I had so much
lodging.  There may be better pictures in the National Gallery; but not a
head, sharp features, and swift, shining eyes.  On Saturday, describing
Paris streets!  That will not be a good moment for the general public.
stand or fall by their proofs, and are only logical in so far as they are
everybody nodding his head to him in the name of peace.
From the matter of hunting, the talk veered into a general comparison of
blows.
this lymphatic bagman martyred?  We concluded at once it was on some
which he spoke of his political beliefs were, in our eyes, suited to
which deceived me.  He was a mild, gentle creature, anyway; and I hope he
gone too far, and killed a willing horse; his face fell; I am sure he
shamed by the lions of his caravan!  I never saw anybody look more
The young ladies, the graces of Origny, were not present at our start,

it were the same acre, it will no more be the same river of Oise.  And
a good woman, and a good book, and tobacco, there is nothing so agreeable

had not been for an excited fellow on the bank, we should have paddled
herself.  After every dish was sent in, she would come and look on at the
philosophical, and scorned long journeys and early starts on principle.
patches.  Here and there along the wayside were posters forbidding
shall never forget how spacious and how eminently habitable it looked as
politely—too politely, thinks the _Cigarette_—if we could have beds: she

As long as you keep in the upper regions, with all the world bowing to
commiserate the poor.  ‘I hope to God,’ he said,—and I trust the prayer
of bringing us out again upon the scene of our disgrace.  We were very
He also loved Paris, where he had worked as a decorative painter in his
trotted by in their cloaks.  Madame Bazin came out after a while; she was
How little we pay our way in life!  Although we have our purses
sweeps, and with a swift and equable gallop, the ceaseless stream of
their heads, and running to and fro in timorous indecision; and when they
to paddle in that child’s dreams for many a night after.
centuries making the Golden Valley, seemed to have changed its fancy, and
not attain above the knees of the cathedral, which stood, upright and
it might be a hundred feet away from you, climbing the next billow.  At
I find I never weary of great churches.  It is my favourite kind of
all good preachers, it sets you preaching to yourself;—and every man is
as they went.  In this order they made the circuit of the cathedral,
be difficult not to understand the _Miserere_, which I take to be the
One other circumstance distressed me.  I could bear a _Miserere_ myself,
our whole Inland Voyage, which my fancy still preserves, and sometimes

Fère; we forecast other La Fères in the future;—although things went
determined, and we put the boats into the train.
waterside pleasantries with the steersman perched among the lumber, or
now on that, without intelligence or effort.  Truly we were coming into

front, the drummers’ tiger-skins, the pipers’ swinging plaids, the

fancies.  Some of the niches are gilt and painted; and in a great square
they all three have elegant, flapping hats like cavaliers.  As the
moon?  The gargoyles may fitly enough twist their ape-like heads; fitly
have to write; but the receipt of letters is the death of all holiday



remember, when we came into L’Isle Adam, for instance, how we met dozens
we had no want of amusement in return; but as soon as we sank into
We ceased reading entirely.  Sometimes when I found a new paper, I took a
blankest unconcern.  We cared not a fraction for this place or that.  We
were approaching Verberie, the _Cigarette_ brought my heart into my mouth
Canoeing was easy work.  To dip the paddle at the proper inclination, now
disturbance, like a Government Office.  The great wheels of intelligence
else, who managed the paddling; I was aware of somebody else’s feet
get dead drunk, and yet keep sober to enjoy it.  I have a notion that
eyesore, and sometimes quite a companion for me, and the object of
querulous like that of sparrows on a winter’s morning.  The rare
waiting penitents; and out in the nave, one very old woman was engaged in
She was as dead an old woman as ever I saw; no more than bone and
folk, we might be put out of all conceit of life.
if you were very anxious, and tell you a date or two; for it figured
The church at Creil was a nondescript place in the inside, splashed with
all its cruising; why, you would have thought if anything could be done
This is foolishness to us Protestants; and not of great importance
the 17th of January 1832: according to a coloured bas-relief, it seems to
fellow-men, which would make a sad and sordid business of this life.
to me.  I see that as clearly as a proposition in Euclid.  For these

round a corner, and there, in a little green round the church, was a bevy
was out of their teens.  The sister, so to speak, prepared a meal for us;
strolled up there, were trying to keep order with the audience.
audience laughed in high good-humour over the man’s declamations; but
down as readily as one of his own marionnettes to a peal of jeering
dispraise of riches, and throw up a situation to go strolling with a
stumble through a farce, he is made free of a new order of thoughts.  He

daughters, brazen, blowsy hussies, who sang and acted, without an idea of
drank a cup together in the kitchen, talking of roads, and audiences, and

    cheval—Le Mari mécontent—Tais-toi, gamin—Mon voisin
had better teeth.  He was once an actor in the Châtelet; but he
was no longer ago than last night, perhaps, that the receipts only
But what pleased me most was one outbreak of his, when we had been
to be an artist.  And to know what art is, is to have an interest for

account in comic prose.

the noise of trees and water made an accompaniment to our dozing
a curiosity.
stove; and the most beautiful adventures are not those we go to seek.

   _If any deed be done_, _if any fire_
bloody finger this hollow among the hills; and since the Cameronian gave
in the byre, there will be told again, amid the silence of the young and
her.  The old “riding Rutherfords of Hermiston,” of whom she was the last
his very doer (although lawyers have long spoons) surviving him not long,
blood of life in her, no grasp or gaiety; pious, anxious, tender,
or rather a source of legends, in the Parliament House.  He was described
the husband, to lend dignity to his descendants, and to himself a title,
was wretchedly ill-guided; nothing answerable to the expense of
at each dish, as at a fresh ordeal, her eye hovered toward my lord’s
Mrs. Weir sat at the head of the table whimpering without disguise; and
to his study and shut the door behind him.
whom he favoured with so many pleasantries.  “Kirstie and me maun have
sometimes with Archie, the only child of that scarce natural union.  The
Deil’s Hags, sit with him on the Praying Weaver’s stone, and talk of the
hissed them all in my lord’s travelling carriage, and cried, “Down with
meant to be undutiful, my lamb; your mother kens that—she kens it well,
minister was a marrowy expounder of the law, and my lord sat under him
these like the hills of Naphtali?” and her tears would flow.


identification, and drew the inevitable private inference that the Lord

the carriage?
plain command—the First with Promise, dear?  Mind you upon the beam and
activity.  She dawdled about the lasses at their work, looking stupidly
slippers. I—I hae never made ye any.”
burnside washing, and saw her pass with her loose, weary, dowdy gait.
hurried steps, and appeared in the dining-room, where Kirstie was at the
speeritually minded, my dear.”
modified among Scots heather.
“Na, na, it’s no sae bad as that.  It’s the mistress, my lord; she just
Dressed as she was for her last walk, they had laid the dead lady on her
waur—I micht have been marriet upon a skirting Jezebel like you!”
My Lord Justice-Clerk was known to many; the man Adam Weir perhaps to
entering the sick-room with a facetious and appalling countenance,
invincible.  But papa had memory of no other.  He was not harsh to the
continual rewards without excitement.  This atmosphere of his father’s
time came for him to join these revels) he turned pale and sickened in
“Hout!” said the gracious father, “just his mother over again—daurna say
for they were neither of them quick.  He had a word of contempt for the
“Indeed so,” replied the judge; “very different.  And so I fear are you
With the infinitely delicate sense of youth, Archie avoided the subject
father, held him aloof from all.  It is a fact, and a strange one, that
terrify and repel, Rhadamanthus may be great, but he will scarce be
alternating ends of youth; and Archie was of the parsimonious.  The wind
expired; but my lord would faithfully and cheerfully continue to pour out
It chanced in the year 1813 that Archie strayed one day into the
he was still a man, and had eyes and apprehension; yet a little longer,
with the flannel round his neck was hunted gallowsward with jeers.

their delivery, and the savage pleasure of the speaker in his task, made
Archie passed by his friends in the High Street with incoherent words and
there was no living creature but must have been swift to recognise that
at a certain parody of devotion, which seemed to strip the wretch of his
Frank that he was appalled by Archie’s outburst, and at least conceived
“If quietness is what you wish, Mr. Innes,” said Archie, “and you will
misery; while the other hastened smilingly to spread the news of Weir’s
of the evening, but even in these periods he sat with a great air of


illuminated window-blind, the more blank became the picture of the man
unpardonable affront: and the providence of God alone might foresee the
perhaps there would be found no one bold enough to carry tales.  If this

“When you had the measles, Mr. Archibald, you had them gey and ill; and I

He was not to be long without a rude awakening.  It was in the gloaming

last time, entirely deserted him.  “I have an appointment,” said he.
There was no answer possible to Archie.

your pardon—a God-defying murder.  I have no wish to conceal the truth,”
undutiful.  The position in which I stand is wretched,” said the unhappy
Heedious!  I never gave twa thoughts to heediousness, I have no call to
business to see that ye were never admitted there yourself.  There is a
Frenchi-feed.”
go to it, you would find out for yourself whether Lord Well’n’ton
“I’m nearer voamiting, though, than you would fancy,” said my lord.  The
no son, Mr. Erchibald Weir would have been in a jyle the night.”
the best—there’s just the one thing it’s possible that ye might be with
his desk.
But Lord Glenalmond greeted him without the least mark of surprise or

“In the mart of scandal, in the Parliament House,” said Glenalmond.  “It
you, and after I had seen and warned you—it might have been me—I believe
smile, “Messrs. Creech and Co. were fighting a pretty up-hill battle,
you, I am quite at your command.  Let an old man say it, for once, and
the mouth.  And all that’s nothing.  I was at the trial of this Jopp.
wretched smile, “for life, I suppose—and what can I say? he strikes me as
because your father talks a little sculduddery after dinner, which it is
persons have not done so in the past.  Possibly, in the past also, I may
bring his passions to the bar—or to the bench,” he added.

God’s unfortunate creatures.  You applied that, as I understood, to
“I think I have,” said Archie.  “And the worst is, I think he feels it!

you, my dear, and enable you to keep your promise.  God guide you in the
propose the health of a man very different from me and very much my
front door, and Carstairs ushered in my Lord Glenkindie, hot from a
in for a glass of porter—and at this point he became aware of the third

college society against capital punishment.  This is the extent of what I
The road to Hermiston runs for a great part of the way up the valley of a
the bell on Sundays.  A mile beyond the kirk the road leaves the valley
where policy ended and unpolicied nature began.  My lord had been led by

then it was cut off by the intervening steepness of the hill; and again,
of a legitimate Lord of Parliament, in a work so full of Lords of
ear, like a passing grace in music.  He stepped back with a heart on
chance of pain, even to the avoidance of any opportunity of pleasure; to
youth alone, and drew near to the confines of age, a childless woman.
practically excluded (like a lightkeeper on his tower) from the comforts
immediately aroused her curiosity; he was reticent, and kept it awake.
thought beyond the present moment and its perpetuation to the end of
exquisite and barren pleasure of his view a mile off on the mountains.
She would keep back some piece of news during dinner to be fired off with
invariably the first to break them off; so she managed to retire and not
classes: that he stands in an attitude towards the past unthinkable to
One after another closed his obscure adventures in mid-air, triced up to
benevolence of Lyon King of Arms, my grandson (if he is Scottish) will
there was nae ungodly talk permitted at Cauldstaneslap.  My faither was a
‘just fling your washes and your French dentifrishes in the back o’ the
begot four sons between 1773 and 1784, and a daughter, like a postscript,
to one, and him three parts asleep, having drunk hard.  But it is ill to
thieves had seemed to him to be at his heels, but now the hallucination
upon his earrand.”  It was three miles to Broken Dykes, down hill, and a
naething, neither black nor white.  There was nae noise to be heard, but
three of the afternoon, as they rode up the Vennel with their prisoners,
Cauldstaneslap; but his sons had scarce less glory out of the business.
they went diverse ways, and prospered and failed in different businesses.
Adam of our ancestors, sleeps in all of us till the fit circumstance
business coming alternately with the dreamers.  The second brother, Gib,
to be called flight, to the house of his father.  The clearest of his
did duty for a temple, had been repeatedly stoned by the bairns, and Gib
wife and bairns of his own, since he was so fond of them, “I have no
The third brother had his name on a door-plate, no less, in the city of
pattern of Hob, he had contracted a certain Glasgow briskness and
was well to windward to any counted coins in the pocket; he felt himself

once fulfilling to the letter the tradition of his hero and model.  His
heels of admiration.  The laird, Clem, and Dand, who were Tories and
would liken to Hob.  “He minds me o’ the laird there,” he would say.  “He
kept entirely within the family, like some secret ancestral practice.  To
thoroughly in others.  But as time went on, Archie began to observe an
the third and the most loaded was for girls.
white petticoat showing below, and her best India shawl upon her back (if
delicate living pink.

your India shawls on?”
naebody can deny that it’s unwomanly.  Long hair is the ornament o’ woman
in prayer, and lifted up with a reverent solemnity in the act of
rustic.  The rest of the congregation, like so many sheep, oppressed him
little feet now silent—he marvelled that among all those faces there
sobriety of its winter colouring; and he wondered at its beauty; an
old black table tombstone, and he stopped to contemplate the random
lowered eyes, for he feared he had already offended the kind old
greatness, leaned back in the pew and contemplated vacancy with the
In reason he must admire her clothes, and it was possible that he should
meditated flight.  Possibilities crowded on her; she hung over the future
the maiden, was suddenly unmasked in profile.  Though not quite in the
dispute: “The cutty looks weel,” he had said, “and it’s no very like
primroses.  She wore on her shoulders—or rather on her back and not her
He knew who she must be—Kirstie, she of the harsh diminutive, his
her little breasts the fiery eye of the topaz and the pale florets of
had he been doing?  He had been exquisitely rude in church to the niece
at, if she _had_ taken a sugar-bool.  Mrs. MacTaggart, the elder’s wife
girl before?  And here she was, making an exhibition of herself before

Hermiston brae, walking on air, dwelling intoxicated among clouds of

“Do you know, in our old kirk, among our good old grey dames, you made an
they could see on the one hand the straggling caravan scaling the braes
perhaps it marked a stage of that dizziness of gratified vanity, in which


discomposure.  There returned again the vision of the two brown eyes
complacently dwelt on was that of Miss Christina in her character of the
lie still and stupid, and think upon nothing with devotion, and be
blinding wreaths of haze.
decomposed into a sequence of accidents happily concurring.

“But I’m saying, Dand”—she came nearer him—“I’m for the muirs.  I must
“Folks say sae,” replied the bard.
But she clung to her brother’s neighbourhood, she knew not why.
thought and said.  Women, when they did not absorb, were only children to
bog and briar, or on a late afternoon of Sunday.  He whistled.  “My denty
and shrilly piping.  So, when she had once passed the Slap, Kirstie was
far-away bright panes of glass.  It amused her to have so extended a
brother was a laird himself: it was all very well to speak of casual
expectation, a quiet, solitary figure in the midst of the grey moss.  I
the hollow of the Deil’s Hags, to see there, like an answer to his
Young Hermiston was struck with a certain chill.  He was reminded that he
meet the laird, and remaining seated to receive the expected admirer.

marrying—why, where are they now?  It’s deadly commonplace, but, after
“Have you mind of Dand’s song?” she answered.  “I think he’ll have been
“No that I’m thinking that really,” she said.  “By my way of thinking,

a sense of the tragedy of life; there were pathos and music and a great
Weaver,” on the very scene of his brief tragedy and long repose.  And now
something merely bright and shapely, was caught up into the zone of
officiated.  She made good time accordingly down the steep ascent, and



to man.  For instance, who could have imagined that, not a month after he
porter and oysters, the race-course and the ring; and manfully prepared,

morning and leave only a note on the breakfast table to announce the

“They’re no mines, it was the lassie made them,” said Kirstie; “and,

brought forth, one after another, these somewhat baseless charges.  Then
accuracy.  Dwaibly, for instance; nothing could be more calumnious.
prudent one besides.  Frank was thus conscious that he had one ally and
He was not politic in that; he listened to the voice of irritation.
Hob thought him too light, Gib too profane.  Clem, who saw him but for a

Young Hay and young Pringle appeared again.  There was another supper at
very well laughing, but I’m not very well pleased.  Poor Archie is a good
private affairs.
whichever you like to call it.  And for my part, I think it a disgrace,”
must say that.  If there’s any blame going, you’ll always be sure of _my_
mark of the young ass; and so he talked at random.  There was no
was.  And Mr. Innes was very anxious about him now; he was really uneasy,
flattered himself he was a fellow of unusual quickness and penetration.


you like—might fall out upon, and I step in and _obsto principiis_.  I
time he had watched Frank as far as the Swingleburn-foot, appearing and
Scotland.  But the step once taken, was practically irretrievable.  He
full of a different, though a cognate subject.  What was Archie’s little
suspicious about this trinity of moorland settlements.  He would have
was Archie’s secret, here was the woman, and more than that—though I have
and Clem would prove inclement; and Dand fly in danders, and Hob blow up
some of his control.  He changed his stick from one hand to the other,
“I beg to remind you—” began Archie.
careful.  It’s not a safe business.  Not safe, my boy,” said he.
“I assure you,” Archie broke out, “this is all a figment of your
it concerns your safety and good character, and therefore my honour as

vindictive in his nature; but, if revenge came in his way, it might as

fallen silent; to him, but an unremarkable change of amusements.  And she
With a sense of justice that Lord Hermiston might have envied, she had
knees to her, heard his persuasive instances with a deadly weakness, and
looked forward over a waste of hours, and saw herself go on to rage, and
coquetry awoke.  By the faint light of her nocturnal rush, she stood
there with a rayless star; taking the sweet air of the moors and the
bosom—had touched her with a wand of transformation, and she seemed young
am, wi’ nayther man nor bairn to ca’ my ain, wearying a’ folks wi’ my ill
“Why, Kirstie, you’re very enigmatical to-night—and very eloquent,”
foxglove bells.  Deary me, but it’s lang syne!  Folk have dee’d sinsyne
into a land which is like a dream, and the world and the folks in’t’ are
always thought of her, I wouldna harm her for the universe, my woman!”
“I swear by my honour I have done her no wrong,” said Archie.  “I swear
think, laddie, I would dee!  Excuse a daft wife that loves ye, and that
wore the wretched semblance of a smile; hers was convulsed for a moment.
CHAPTER IX—AT THE WEAVER’S STONE
welcome.  Archie’s slow pace was quickened; his legs hasted to her though
have found herself confronted with a grey-faced, harsh schoolmaster—it
thinking.

thing we must see to before all.  You’re worth waiting for, Kirstie!
not been made to their conjoint future.  It had in fact been often
these expectations, and constant, poor girl! in her large-minded madness,
“Your aunt for one,” said Archie.
it’s for a sheep to eat.”
“Mr. Frank!” she cried.  “What nex’, I would like to ken?”
I think I’ll better be going.  I’ll be wishing you good evening, Mr.
He could only repeat the appealing “Kirstie!”
fear of this explosive engine in his arms, whose works he did not
believe, on the very morning of the writer’s sudden seizure and death.
The intended argument, then, so far as it was known at the time of the
moor, which ends in a quarrel, and in Archie killing Frank beside the
character grew and strengthened so in the writing that I am sure he had
destined to furnish the climax and essential tragedy of the tale.
‘Criminal Trials,’ _quam primum_.  Also an absolutely correct text of the
autumn, before two Lords of Justiciary; and that the Lord Justice-General
Whether the final escape and union of Archie and Christina would have
written the earlier parts, the truth about the end, though indisputably
about my Braxfield story.  Braxfield—only his name is Hermiston—has a son
_Virginibus Puerisque_, will remember how he is fascinated by Raeburn’s
wife from persecution by a former husband who reappears after being
phase in which they occur in the present story.
seventies:—“I’ve been to church and am not depressed—a great step.  It
incarnation of the eternal feminine in the elder Kirstie.  The little
and fired them to the action of his rescue.  The scene of the
the romance of Scottish scenery and character which was at all times so
date of the story.  To Mr. Baxter he writes a month later, “I have a
Auckland,—then work on the _Ebb-Tide_, on a new tale called _St. Ives_,
There remains one more point to be mentioned, as to the speech and
which he was too strong and too jovial, but from cherished coarseness.”
Dalmailing,—during this period a great softening had taken place in
it is distilled from a number of different haunts and associations among
especially Teviotdale and Ettrick.  Some of the geographical names

In a little place called Le Monastier, in a pleasant highland valley
through the Cevennes.  A traveller of my sort was a thing hitherto
troublesome to pitch, and troublesome to strike again; and even on the
of the sack by day.  I call it the sack, but it was never a sack by
to be left alone, so that you are chained to your brute as to a fellow
another went head over heels into the air; until a want of confidence
bought white bread for the donkey when he had been content with black
cakes of chocolate and tins of Bologna sausage.  All this, except what I
own mishaps, let me in two words relate the lesson of my experience.  If
any rate, we were very warm and unfriendly, and spoke with a deal of
designed.  It is true they tightened the cords with a will; as many as
as I was within sight of the windows, a secret shame and the fear of some
forbid, thought I, that I should brutalise this innocent creature; let
figures ever infinitesimally moving, foot by foot, a yard to the minute,
I told him, we had but newly left Monastier.
or masonic word of donkey-drivers, Proot!  All the time, he regarded me
feelings, grateful and the reverse.  It is only a traveller, hurrying by
peaks in winter from the threshold of their homes, in an isolation, you
incessantly belabouring.  A moments pause in this ignoble toil, and she
was plainly unworthy of Modestines affection.  But the incident saddened
I had the devils own trouble to get the thing righted; and the instant I
the whole length; and, encumbered as I was, without a hand to help
waiting for another blow.  I came very near crying; but I did a wiser
If I were to reach the lakeside before dark, she must bestir her little


mother asked me what I wanted by the lake at such an hour.  I replied, in


visit of a fat sow, grouting under the table and rubbing against your
and an iron fork, the table is completely laid.  My knife was cordially
beasts.
You see, she added to her husband, I understood that.
it be my last as well.  I kept my eyes to myself, and know nothing of the
clouds flew fast and low; the wind piped over the naked platform; and the
Look, it is too fine.
gallant little trotlet that devoured the miles.  It was not a remarkable
common, sniffed the air martially as one about to do great deeds, and
the twisted ribbons of the highway.  It was a cheerless prospect, but one
and ten thousand francs were offered for his head.  And yet, when he was
and me.  The furrow down which he was journeying lay at an angle to the
que vous venez?  She did it with so high an air that she set me
   PILGRIMS PROGRESS.

There was no direct road to Cheylard, and it was no easy affair to make a
well enough read in Herbert Spencer, felt a sort of silence fall for an
direction which, as I found afterwards, I had misunderstood, complacently
came flying up out of the north.  At the other side of the wood I sighted
darkness overhead; even the flying clouds pursued their way invisibly to
however, being entirely absent, except in the form of rain, I determined
the door, being alone and lame; but if I would apply at the next house,
I was willing to pay, I said.  He shook his head.  I rose as high as ten
dou venez-vous?
As for you, mademoiselle, said I, you are a farceuse.

barbarior.  Let me say it in the plural: the Beasts of Gevaudan.
this days adventures; but I will take my oath that I put near an hour to
encampment was not only as black as the pit, but admirably sheltered.  At
ate well, and smoked one of the best cigarettes in my experience.  Then I
difference in the trees, or the lie of the ground, or because I was
ribbon of the road; and, on turning my head, there was Modestine tied to
a mind unsettled by the goddess, was not more pleasantly astray.  I have
famishing cold.  I ate some chocolate, swallowed a mouthful of brandy,
My poor boy! he cried, what does this mean?

the high entertainment of the angels, do we pelt each other with
You will do yourself an evil, she said.  Permit me to boil it for
The husband had begun life as a muleteer, and when I came to charge
misadventures, and my heart was still as cold as a potato towards my
cold, naked, and ignoble, scant of wood, scant of heather, scant of life.

Luc itself was a straggling double file of houses wedged between hill and
to time as I awakened, for my sheepskin sack and the lee of some great

My way lay up the bald valley of the river, along the march of Vivarais
follow a road that mounted on the left among the hills of Vivarais, the
upon; and if landscapes were sold, like the sheets of characters of my
sound.  I have rarely approached anything with more unaffected terror
parts of him resolved into earth and broken up with the farmers harrow.
it turned out that I was not a pedlar, but a literary man, who drew
after Dr. Pusey, for whose conversion the good man had continued ever
monastery.  Father Apollinaris (for that was my companions name) stopped
Modestine, who seemed to have a disaffection for monasteries, would
THE MONKS
garden.  This is no more than the main court, laid out in sandy paths and
When I had eaten well and heartily, Brother Ambrose, a hearty conversible
their beads or meditate, and when they were to rise and go to rest.  At
With this, he was a man eminently sociable, greedy of news, and simple-
bread, and make cartwheels, and take photographs; where one superintends
In all these journeyings to and fro, many silent fathers and brethren
doubt, the most of mankind grossly overeat themselves; our meals serve
Those with whom I spoke were singularly sweet-tempered, with what I can
of women, but in this vow of silence.  I have had some experience of lay
bell, and so on, hour by hour, and sometimes quarter by quarter, till
From this point of view, we may perhaps better understand the monks
the Liberator comes, at the very moment, even before they have carried
beating of the bell, breaking in to show that the last office was over

But there was another side to my residence at Our Lady of the Snows.  At
I had dined alone, because I arrived late; but at supper I found two
as a novice.  Already the new life was beginning to modify his

the height of his fury, the old soldier found a warning look directed on

Your father and mother? cried the priest.  Very well; you will convert
Snows, now was the appointed hour.
with all the terrors of the law.  He launched into harrowing details of
comme pretre.
shows how profoundly I was out of sympathy with these good Trappists,
views.
uncivil usage.  He was sadly discountenanced.


The company in the inn kitchen that night were all men employed in survey
descended through a precipitous village into the valley of the Chassezac.
bleating with one accord like the birds in spring, and each one

on my way again, by what appeared to be chill rain-drops falling on my

tops, or straight upward to the sky; and the encampment felt secure and
the cock first crows, not this time to announce the dawn, but like a
it.  We have a moment to look upon the stars.  And there is a special
runnel over the stones.  I lay lazily smoking and studying the colour of
from which we cower into our houses, seemed after all a gentle habitable
gradually it took articulate shape in my ears, until I became aware that

that, indeed, shed over all a spirit of life and of breathing peace, and
fancy will sometimes be importunate.  I had been most hospitably received


flickering wings between the sun and me.
with eagle eyes, he stared on the Pacific, I took possession, in my own
picturesque, illustrious for stirring events.  Speaking largely, I was in
the generals of the king; and sometimes at night, or in masquerade,
with psalms, eager to fight, eager to pray, listening devoutly to the
reprisal--in a land where the tyranny of the Church produced the Camisard
a glad noise among the hills.  Sometimes it would cross the track in a
in the bottom (for it was rapidly growing a river, collecting on all
dwarfed to almost comical smallness by the distance.  But the rogue had

drunken, and sat writing up my journal, I suppose as many more came
thing of forty, quite troubled at this roaring table dhote, whom I
assured Clarisse of my hearty admiration.  She took it like milk, without
their parents to good works.  A child of fifteen months at Quissac spoke
was changed in the heart of any upright Protestant.
Christian persecutor.  The Work of the Propagation of the Faith went
Seguier, as his companions called him--a wool-carder, tall, black-faced,
his garrison fire upon the mob.  One Camisard (for, according to some, it
archpriest himself fell, broke his thigh, and could only crawl into the
gave his blow and his reason; and then all kneeled and sang psalms around

I have committed none.  My soul is like a garden full of shelter and of
IN THE VALLEY OF THE TARN
rapid slopes of the valley; others, where there was a margin to the
put out smooth and youthful shoots, and begin a new life upon the ruins
unterraced, was usually too steep for a man to lie upon.  I should have
The position was unpleasantly exposed.  One or two carts went by upon the
my memory of how the Count of Gevaudan, riding with a party of dragoons
something swift and indistinct between the chestnuts.  A profusion of
about.  Nothing was to be seen, nothing more was to be heard, but a few
position than the soldiers of Captain Poul to an undaunted Camisard.  I
Yes, said I.  As you see.
occupied with a case of conscience.  Was I to pay for my nights lodging?
among dishes in a bedroom may perhaps make clean the body; but the
while the old man walked beside me and talked about the morning and the
he quoted, and few chosen.
pleasure of my companion than embarrassed by my own equivocal position.
settled principle of love and patience, and a firm belief in all our
they seemed all upright and simple people.  The Plymouth Brother hung
The valley below La Vernede pleased me more and more as I went forward.
Scottish body; although the chestnuts were already picked out by the
of the cause, could never rest confident of the person.

cups and glasses of liqueur.  Most of these kind advisers were
some prolixity of reference.  They told me the country was still full of
the population lived together on very quiet terms; and there was even an

partial intimacies.  And if we find but one to whom we can speak out of
two black hamlets, one with an old castle atop to please the heart of the
grew in the meadow, hard by the rivers brink; when to my disgust the
fell into the bottom of the glen where I was lying.  The oak rose before
as mild as May, and I slept with the fur thrown back.
I was wakened next morning (Wednesday, October 2nd) by the same dog--for
almost contrary direction.  A few steps farther, and I saw a whole
Bavile and his dragoons, and how you may ride rough-shod over a religion
essence of his least reflections; and you may change creeds and dogmas by
hillside, in this wild valley, among chestnut gardens, and looked upon in
was the band of Spirit Seguier; men who had joined their voices with his
walked into a flock of sheep in a plain, and found some asleep and some
one family that is not Protestant, but neither is it Catholic.  It is
surprised a man brought up among the infinitesimal and contentious
that, when the time came, they might unite with self-respect.
with three turns of the key.

Shovel, and the long-promised aid from England.  You may take this ridge
from head to foot with chestnuts, and here and there breaking out into a
surrendered, or Roland had fallen fighting with his back against an
Its odd to think of, but perhaps I thus became as inexplicable to the
accidents of life, and reaches with tremulous hand beyond the grave and
flowed away.  Our two shadows--mine deformed with the knapsack, hers
until another turning shot me without preparation into St. Germain de
cocks and chuckling of contented hens, betook me to the window of the

Strange was the position of this little Catholic metropolis, a thimbleful
That these continual stirs were once busy in St. Germain de Calberte, the
dull sound, upon the sward.  The noise was as of a thin fall of great
ever.  Was it Apollo, or Mercury, or Love with folded wings?  Who shall
for myself, I believe it is the current philosophy in these parts.  I
dinner a more economical juice of the grape--La Parisienne, they call it.
the rest of the world, was sure I was a pedlar; but, unlike others, he
public tragedy, love will have its way.  In the high tide of war he
more heartily in this manner; for she had a sort of affection for me,
On examination, on the morning of October 3rd, Modestine was pronounced
characteristic of the country.  The young women of the Cevennes profit by
devil.
regard me as a god.  She loved to eat out of my hand.  She was patient,
