AROUND THE WORLD IN EIGHTY DAYS
a bearded, tranquil Byron, who might live on a thousand years without
Sciences.  He belonged, in fact, to none of the numerous societies
not imagine how he had made his fortune, and Mr. Fogg was the last
club as to lost and unheard-of travellers, pointing out the true

When he breakfasted or dined all the resources of the club--its
almost superhumanly prompt and regular.  On this very 2nd of October he
Phileas Fogg was seated, and James Forster, the dismissed servant,
and dance on a rope like Blondin.  Then I got to be a professor of
"Good!  What time is it?"

Madame Tussauds as lively as my new master!"
perfectly well-balanced, as exactly regulated as a Leroy chronometer.


that Mr. Phileas Fogg was looking for a servant, and that his life was
good, thatll do," said Passepartout to himself.
year and season at which they were in turn to be laid out for wearing;
What a domestic and regular gentleman!  A real machine; well, I dont
seventy-six times, reached the Reform Club, an imposing edifice in Pall
his next task, occupied him till the dinner hour.  Dinner passed as
"On the contrary," broke in Ralph, "I hope we may put our hands on the
"Perhaps hes a manufacturer, then."
the mercy of the first comer.  A keen observer of English customs
who arrived at or left London by rail, and a judicial examination was
be in vain, for he thought that the prize offered would greatly

than a hundred years ago.  And that is why the search for this thief
that the section between Rothal and Allahabad, on the Great Indian

Stuart, whose turn it was to deal, gathered them up, and went on: "You


"Twenty thousand pounds!" cried Sullivan.  "Twenty thousand pounds,
"You are joking."

agitated; not so much by the value of their stake, as because they had
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ASTOUNDS PASSEPARTOUT, HIS SERVANT

"Monsieur is going to leave home?"
"Well have no trunks; only a carpet-bag, with two shirts and three
once more.  But surely a gentleman so chary of his steps would stop

Master and man then descended, the street-door was double-locked, and
touched his susceptible heart.
"In eighty days; on Saturday, the 21st of December, 1872, at a quarter
"Whats the matter?" asked Mr. Fogg.

theoretically and on paper, in this minimum of time, and with the
even dared to say, "Why not, after all?  Stranger things have come to
liability of trains to run off the line, collisions, bad weather, the
wagers for or against Phileas Fogg, who was set down in the betting
"If the thing is feasible, the first to do it ought to be an


9th of October, at Suez.  The Mongolia plied regularly between Brindisi
out from under eyebrows which he was incessantly twitching.  He was

"A man rather feels the presence of these fellows, consul, than
an honest man?"
yards along, extended into the roadstead.  A number of fishing-smacks
"Four hours; long enough to get in her coal.  It is thirteen hundred
else."
town, while the greater part disembarked in the boats, and landed on
"No, its my masters."
"There, on the corner of the square," said Fix, pointing to a house two



"He is: a Frenchman, named Passepartout."


Thursday, October 3rd, at 7.20 a.m.  "Left Paris, Thursday, at 8.40
behind-hand or in advance of his time.  On this Friday, October 9th, he
the quay, as if he did not feel that he, at least, was obliged not to


"You have plenty of time; its only twelve oclock."
"I regulate my watch?  Never!"

"No doubt, for he is carrying an enormous sum in brand new banknotes
lived a solitary existence in London, was said to be rich, though no
"Certainly."
companion to make his purchases, after recommending him not to miss the

instantly to Bombay, take passage on board the Mongolia, follow my

forces or commanding the Sepoy troops, and receiving high salaries ever
dancing suddenly ceased.  Yet the good ship ploughed straight on,
of the dangers of the Arabic Gulf, which the old historians always
voyage, for he was well fed and well lodged, took a great interest in
"Fix."
"A curious place, this India?"
"Quite well, and I too.  I eat like a famished ogre; its the sea air."
in the steamer bar-room, which Passepartout never failed to accept with

Ocean, and the vast cisterns where the English engineers were still at
Indian coast: two hours later the pilot came on board.  A range of

this vast country, and has a governor-general stationed at Calcutta,
has now passed away, leaving the British possessions in India directly
Leaving Bombay, it passes through Salcette, crossing to the continent
the passport office.  As for the wonders of Bombay--its famous city
found it far from palatable.  He rang for the landlord, and, on his
"Perhaps for the travellers as well!"
a moment, any more than Passepartout, that Phileas Fogg would remain
long-robed Armenians--were collected.  It happened to be the day of a
towards the station, when he happened to espy the splendid pagoda on
long-gowned adversaries with his fists and a vigorous application of

Chapter XI
almost as familiar as a native with the customs, history, and character
product of the exact sciences.
Sir Francis Cromarty exchanged a few words from time to time, and now
difficulty about this worthy fellows adventure at the pagoda."
villages, above which rose the minarets of the pagodas.  This fertile
eyes, gazed at the train as it passed.  The travellers crossed, beyond
was able to purchase some Indian slippers, ornamented with false
delays, and accidents which might happen on the way.  He recognised
This famous timepiece, always regulated on the Greenwich meridian,

"Where are we?" asked Sir Francis.
"What would you have, officer?  The papers were mistaken."
"Mr. Fogg, this is a delay greatly to your disadvantage."
point.  The papers were like some watches, which have a way of getting
too had been looking about him, and, after a moments hesitation, said,
already, by often irritating him, and feeding him every three months on
advance; but the Indian declined to be tempted.  Yet the offer was an
Returning to the Indian, whose small, sharp eyes, glistening with
a sort of saddle-cloth, and attached to each of his flanks some

peculiar howdahs provided for them, were horribly jostled by the swift
for rest, during which Kiouni, after quenching his thirst at a
Hindoo faith.  The English have not been able to secure complete
consideration.  Should Mr. Fogg choose to make him, Passepartout, a
Nothing occurred during the night to disturb the slumberers, although
inhabited places, thinking it safer to keep the open country, which

bestride the animal at a moments notice, should flight become
other.  Upon the car, which was drawn by four richly caparisoned zebus,
statue; these were striped with ochre, and covered with cuts whence
rajah, wearing, as in life, a turban embroidered with pearls, a robe of
procession had disappeared, asked: "What is a suttee?"
least emotion, "that these barbarous customs still exist in India, and
The prospect of so frightful an existence drives these poor creatures
"Everybody knows about this affair in Bundelcund."
"To-morrow, at the first light of dawn."

icy exterior.  He began to love Phileas Fogg.


that the abduction must be made that night, and not when, at break of
the trees in the deepening dusk, stood a hundred steps away.
rajah, lighted by torches, were watching at the doors and marching to
They lay down at the foot of a tree, and waited.
the attempt, and advanced, followed by the others.  They took a
They set noiselessly to work, and the Parsee on one side and
then, could they save her?  Sir Francis shook his fists, Passepartout
Sir Francis would have liked to read Phileas Foggs eyes.  What was
repeated, "Why not, after all?  Its a chance,--perhaps the only one; and
a stupor caused by the fumes of hemp, and passed among the fakirs, who

The resuscitated rajah approached Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg, and, in an
the priests, recovered from their terror, perceived that an abduction
The rash exploit had been accomplished; and for an hour Passepartout
seven oclock, the young woman being still in a state of complete
interrupted line of railway being resumed, would enable them to reach

When the poet-king, Ucaf Uddaul, celebrates the charms of the queen of
rounded figure and the beauty of her bosom, where youth in its flower
adventure at Pillaji, and, if he should be caught afterwards by the
debtor."
fully recovered her senses.  What was her astonishment to find herself
Phileas Fogg understood what was passing in Aoudas mind, and offered,
Benares was Sir Francis Cromartys destination, the troops he was
sacred river, and groups of Indians, despite the advanced season and
the left bank of the Ganges; the fortified town of Buxar, or Patna, a
Hong Kong at noon; so that Phileas Fogg had five hours before him.


sort of four-wheeled carriage, drawn by two horses, in which they took

"But the steamer leaves at noon!" observed Passepartout, nervously.
Obadiah, a fat, round man, followed by the clerk, entered.  He
clock over the judge seemed to go around with terrible rapidity.
"But of what are we accused?" asked Passepartout, impatiently.
"Thats it," muttered Passepartout; "these are the rogues who were
what they were going to do at the pagoda of Pillaji."
pagoda of Malabar Hill, at Bombay."
consulted the priests of Malabar Hill.  Knowing that the English

has admitted that he violated the sacred pagoda of Malabar Hill, at
Fix rubbed his hands softly with satisfaction; if Phileas Fogg could be
thousand pounds.
him.  "More than a thousand pounds apiece; besides, they pinch my feet."
"The rascal is off, after all!" he exclaimed.  "Two thousand pounds
Chapter XVI

medium of her gratitude.
The first few days of the voyage passed prosperously, amid favourable
the Rangoon rapidly approached the Straits of Malacca, which gave
take any steps there.  The arrest must be made at Hong Kong, or the
should delay his departure.  I have failed at Bombay, and I have failed
reflection.
anything could be effected, might get full under way again for Yokohama.
exclaimed, "You here, on the Rangoon?"
is Mr. Fogg?"

Chapter XVII
person, whom he had first met at Suez, had then encountered on board
friends at the Reform Club, sent to follow him up, and to ascertain
the Strait of Malacca, which separates the peninsula of that name from
by a sleek pair of New Holland horses, carried Phileas Fogg and Aouda
Passepartout, who had been purchasing several dozen mangoes--a fruit

Passepartout blamed the captain, the engineer, and the crew, and
"You believe in this journey around the world, then?"

"Yes, and no," returned Fix; "there is good and bad luck in such
to deal plainly with Passepartout.  If he did not find it practicable
surprise; and the disturbances, if they existed, would have been more

steamer.  The Rangoon rolled heavily and the passengers became
were a part of his programme, and had been foreseen.  Aouda was amazed
at his masters service; steamers and railways obeyed him; wind and
barometer, which seemed to have no intention of rising.  Passepartout
Passepartout longed to ask him if the steamer had left for Yokohama;
Passepartout, who heard what passed, would willingly have embraced the
delight, exclaiming, "Pilot, you are the best of good fellows!"
seriously imperil the remainder of his tour.
the Club Hotel.  A room was engaged for the young woman, and Mr. Fogg,
Aouda at first said nothing.  She passed her hand across her forehead,
Passepartout, delighted that the young woman, who was very gracious to
of the English has created upon it an important city and an excellent
everywhere the evidence of English supremacy.  At the Victoria port he
"This is bad," muttered Passepartout, "for the gentlemen of the Reform
not persuade yourself to separate from us.  Come and engage your berth."
which was a large camp-bed furnished with cushions.  Several persons
Chinese government has in vain attempted to deal with the evil by
that Fix was going to continue it with them.  When the bottles were

put themselves to a useless expense."
youll help me, Ill let you have five hundred of them."
"Thats just what we count on doing."
interrupt my masters journey.  But, though I found you out some time

Passepartout was speechless with astonishment when Fix displayed this
"My master is the most honourable of men!"
reject the suspicions which forced themselves upon his mind; he did not
exhausted in mind and body.


was confused by his patience and generosity:
the least vexation, contented himself with taking his carpet-bag,
sir, a passenger by the Rangoon, which arrived yesterday?"

And, offering his arm to Aouda, he directed his steps toward the docks

"A voyage?"
"Are you in earnest?"
"Well, pilot?" said Mr. Fogg.
Fix ceased to breathe at all.
starts from Shanghai."
"In an hour; as soon as provisions could be got aboard and the sails


expression of the eye, and energetic and self-reliant countenance,
"Its certain," thought he, "though rascal as he is, he is a polite

It would clearly have been to the masters advantage to carry his
us.  The poles would add nothing, and are only used when we are going
Clouds were rising from the east, and already overcast a part of the
Instead of sailing directly from England to the United States, like a
not seem to him impossible that, by some mistake, the man might have
pilot and crew remained on deck all night.
within two hours, as the wind freshened up anew.

the helm.  They worked as desperately as if they were contesting in a
At daybreak the wind began to blow hard again, and the heavens seemed
"Is the wind north or south?" asked Mr. Fogg quietly.
single triangular sail, of strong canvas, was hoisted as a storm-jib,
monstrous waves, preserving always, fortunately, a speed equal to
of darkness and the rising of the storm with dark misgivings.  He

and the Tankadere again bounded forward on this mountainous sea, though
only one day to traverse them!  That very evening Mr. Fogg was due at
Bunsby found himself at six oclock not more than ten miles from the
"Signal her!" said Phileas Fogg quietly.

and disordered hair, was seen to emerge from the second cabin, and to
Passepartout had but few steps to go; and, rushing upon the plank, he
Then, as Fix occurred to him: "As for that rascal, I hope we are well
of the steamer, to the after-deck.  He saw no one who resembled either

He fell thunderstruck on a seat.  He saw it all now.  He remembered
His pocket was empty; he had not a solitary shilling, not so much as a
crowd of ships bearing the flags of all nations.
He had, at least, one resource,--to call on the French and English
children, who looked as if they had been cut out of Japanese screens,
to a dead white, but never yellow, like the Chinese, from whom the
the odorous beverage was being drunk with saki, a liquor concocted from
long life and prosperity.
nor pork; and, knowing also that it is a sacrilege to kill cattle,
The streets at last became quiet, and the patrol, the officers of
that he must get something to eat at all hazards, and the sooner he did
might also get a little money to satisfy the immediate cravings of

which at first had seemed so simple, began to grow more and more
UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GOD TINGOU!
leaving the Empire of the Sun for the States of the Union.


"Especially after a good meal."
The engagement was concluded there and then.
comprising Europeans and natives, Chinese and Japanese, men, women and
Another reproduced the most singular combinations with a spinning-top;
But the principal attraction was the exhibition of the Long Noses, a
somersaults.

crying, "Ah, my master! my master!"
followed by Passepartout, who in his hurry had retained his wings, and
paying the stipulated price of his passage to John Busby, and rewarding
his missing servant.  Chance, or perhaps a kind of presentiment, at
overtaken by drunkenness, in smoking opium at a tavern in Hong Kong.
connected with the shaft of the paddles.  The General Grant was rigged
attached to him by other ties than gratitude; his silent but generous
transatlantic steamer from New York to Liverpool, would doubtless bring
whole distance would only have been about twelve thousand miles;
"The rogue told me a lot of stories," repeated Passepartout, "about the
board at that moment, Passepartout would have joined issue with him on



let me speak.  As long as Mr. Fogg was on English ground, it was for my


the other, which ply on the Sacramento and its tributaries.  There were
capital.  Taking a carriage at a charge of three dollars, he and Aouda


by the Sioux and Pawnees.  Mr. Fogg thought it a useless precaution,

"Yes," returned Mr. Fogg; "and blows, even if they are political are
Just at this moment there was an unusual stir in the human mass.  All

gained the upper hand.
themselves between two fires; it was too late to escape.  The torrent
"Englishman!" returned the other.  "We will meet again!"
unharmed, and Fix alone bore marks of the fray in his black and blue
more suitably attired, and with Aouda returned to the International
"I will come back to America to find him," said Phileas Fogg calmly.
"But I thought there was a great deal of disturbance in the streets."
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PARTY TRAVEL BY THE PACIFIC RAILROAD
1845, began to colonise.
position.

cold and cheerless, the heavens being overcast with clouds which seemed
which happily could not obstruct the train; nothing could be seen from
The Central Pacific, taking Sacramento for its starting-point, extends
steaming.  The railway track wound in and out among the passes, now

road is once more clear.
buffaloes to get out of the way.
have been helpless.
Chapter XXVII
a strange-looking personage who made his appearance on the platform.

No one ventured to gainsay the missionary, whose excited tone
centuries later, a translation of this precious book, which was written
received from a simple mummy showman a papyrus scroll written by
community at Nauvoo, on the Mississippi, numbering twenty-five thousand

During the lecture the train had been making good progress, and towards
being distilled, 1,000.  Fishes are, of course, unable to live in it,
as Victor Hugo expresses it.  The founder of the City of the Saints
the temple, which they only reached after having traversed several
terrible thing to have to guide so many wives at once across the
He rushed along the track, jumped on the rear platform of the train,

instead of sixteen thousand allowed for the work done on the plains.
Phileas Fogg himself to be beyond the danger of delays and accidents,
increase his chances?"
really more than that.  Her heart sank within her when she recognised


The detective, at least, seemed to have found a way; for, after a few
"Certainly, sir," Aouda quickly replied; "I understand whist.  It is
detective, he was simply an adept, and worthy of being matched against
eastern horizon was bounded by the immense semi-circular curtain which

the station-master at Medicine Bow, the next stopping place, had sent




proposal, and Colonel Proctor was especially delighted, and found the

"I know--I see," repeated Passepartout; "but it would be, if not more
cant prevent me from thinking that it would be more natural for us to
hardly bore upon the rails at all.

behind-hand.
celebrated the inauguration of this great railroad, a mighty instrument
The one hundred and first meridian was passed.

"You have only to try, son of John Bull," replied the colonel.

"Really!"
"To Chicago?"

platform, attended by a Yankee of his own stamp as his second.  But
"Im really very sorry, gentlemen," said the conductor.  "Under any
The two combatants, their seconds, and the conductor passed through the

according to their habit, jumped upon the steps without stopping the
it, throwing the trunks out of the train.  The cries and shots were
garrison, was only two miles distant; but, that once passed, the Sioux
while the struggle continued and the balls whizzed across each other
several minutes; but the brakes were worked and at last they stopped,

arm.  But Passepartout was not to be found, and tears coursed down
"Ah, Mr.--Mr. Fogg!" cried she, clasping his hands and covering them
disappeared."
"I dont know whether you can, sir; but you ought to do so."

and, despite his suspicions and of the struggle which was going on
Fogg.  He had sacrificed his fortune, and was now risking his life, all
Decidedly, I am nothing but an ass!"
whistles were heard approaching from the east.  A great shadow,
stopped.  The engineer, when he found himself in the desert, and the

"To-morrow evening!  But then it will be too late!  We must wait--"
Meanwhile the passengers and some of the wounded, among them Colonel
and saw nothing.  Then she would return, chilled through, to issue out
describe.
sacrificed?  His hesitation did not last long, however.  Calling one of
All were welcomed with joyful cries.  Phileas Fogg distributed the

PHILEAS FOGG
that you should be in New York on the 11th, before nine oclock in the

the frame, held firmly by metallic lashings, to which was attached a
lost time might yet be recovered; and such an opportunity was not to be
Fixs opinion of Phileas Fogg was somewhat modified; but he was
What a journey!  The travellers, huddled close together, could not
time agreed on, by the offer of a handsome reward.
lashings, like the chords of a stringed instrument, resounded as if
Passepartout even felt a strong desire to grasp his ally, Fix, by the
nor fort appeared.  From time to time they sped by some phantom-like
sails unspread.
Island Railroad, which runs directly east, and passes fifty stations.
wanting at Chicago.  Mr. Fogg passed at once from one to the other, and
Chapter XXXII
Mr. Fogg learned all this in consulting his Bradshaw, which gave him
a carriage to the St. Nicholas Hotel, on Broadway.  Rooms were engaged,
among the vessels moored or anchored in the river, for any that were
was a man of fifty, a sort of sea-wolf, with big eyes, a complexion of
"You are bound for--"

"None."
"No."


England, even if Mr. Fogg did not throw some handfuls of bank-bills

captain was a prisoner in his cabin; and why, in short, the Henrietta
of England, might create more difficulties for Mr. Fogg than he
end, so nearly accomplished; and sometimes he boiled over with
detective began to seriously regret that he had embarked on the affair.
course, furled his sails and increased the force of the steam; but the

On this day the engineer came on deck, went up to Mr. Fogg, and began
he, "hell be a famous man!"  He could not help imparting to Fix what

Passepartout, and ordered him to go for Captain Speedy.  It was as if
"Pirate!" cried Captain Speedy.

"The iron hull and the engine.  Is it agreed?"
thousand pounds, unless I arrive in London by a quarter before nine on
"Certainly, from the keel to the truck of the masts--all the wood, that
But on this day they sighted the Irish coast and Fastnet Light.  By ten

there by noon, and would therefore have time to reach London before a
the waves, invariably cut through them.

attempt to do nothing to save her protector, she wept bitterly.
Aouda and he had remained, despite the cold, under the portico of the
he being devoured by one of those secret rages, all the more terrible
Possibly; for once he walked slowly around the room.  But the door was
immediately after that of Fix.  Phileas Foggs eyes brightened for an
"Well hit!" cried Passepartout, "Parbleu! thats what you might call a


the blundering of the detective!  After having steadily traversed that

been doomed to bear.
by remorse; for he accused himself more bitterly than ever of being the
"Madam," he added, "I can do nothing myself--nothing!  I have no
uninhabited, and Phileas Fogg, for the first time since he had lived in
affairs in order.  Passepartout continually ascended and descended the

your existence would have been free and happy.  But now I am ruined."
place the little I have left at your service."

his eyes, and a slight trembling of his lips.  Aouda looked into his
Wilson, of Marylebone parish, that evening.

The papers resumed their discussion about the wager; all those who had
The anxiety in which, for three days, London society existed, cannot be
the hour when Phileas Fogg was due approached, the excitement rose to
"At twenty-three minutes past seven," replied Gauthier Ralph; "and the
"The fact is," resumed Thomas Flanagan, "Mr. Foggs project was
behind-hand, and that Lord Albemarle will lose a cool five thousand."
as he took his seat, "for three thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine."

At the fifty-seventh second the door of the saloon opened; and the

In three minutes he was in Saville Row again, and staggered back into
"Because to-morrow--is Sunday!"
Phileas Fogg, thus kidnapped, without having time to think, left his
Saturday, the twenty-first day of December, when it was really Friday,
hours--that is, the day unconsciously gained.  In other words, while
grudge.  He deducted, however, from Passepartouts share the cost of

"That we might have made the tour of the world in only seventy-eight
brought back from this long and weary journey?
established in the city of Baltimore in the State of Maryland.
grazing, plunging, oblique, or enfilading, or point-blank
Now when an American has an idea, he directly seeks a second
inventors of revolvers, fire-shooting carbines, and similar

the Gun Club there was not quite one arm between four persons
mourning garments were laid aside, together with grief; and the
"This is horrible!" said Tom Hunter one evening, while rapidly

worked out, so many difficulties vanquished?  Its mere waste

the arms of his easy chair; "but if that be the case there, all
to the dogs."

and go and bury myself in the prairies of Arkansas!"
that, at the meeting of the 5th instant, he will bring before


were picturesquely interlaced against the walls.  The gas lit
of a 32-inch mortar.  It was pointed at an angle of ninety degrees,
known, however, for all to be assured that he would not put his
Being nominated director of artillery during the war, he proved
the head of an American.
cannon shall again thunder in the field of battle.  We must make
country would appear wholly impracticable.  This project, the result
second me with all your power, and I will lead you to its
the present moment no direct communication has been established
Somewhat later another Frenchman, named Fontenelle, wrote `The
lighter than hydrogen, reached the moon after a passage of
were to describe enormous geometric figures, drawn in characters
purpose of my present proposal."
the expansive force of gunpowder are practically unlimited.
"Suffer me to finish," he calmly continued.  "I have looked at

and his powerful alarum was worn out by its violent reports.
the evening.  It was a regular torchlight procession.  Irish, Germans,
Midnight arrived, and the enthusiasm showed no signs of diminution.
similar outbreak of enthusiasm.  The crowd gradually deserted
as yet of an atmosphere?  What kind of spectacle would its hidden
Statistical Society of New York, the Philosophical Society of
Barbicanes project, broke into the auditorium, smashed the

assembled all the most eminent men of science.  Here is to be
On the receipt of your favor of the 6th instant, addressed to
the moon at a particular point?
1,200 yards per second; calculations prove that to be sufficient.
separates the earth from its satellite?"

present herself in the most favorable position, etc.?"
December in the ensuing year the moon _will_ present these
luminary; in other words, it must be comprised within the
shot, and as the shot cannot reach the moon until after a deviation
between 0@ and 28@ of N. or S. lat.
commence the works necessary for such an experiment, and to be

these atoms combined together chemically according to their
rotation, and gravitating round it in the shape of innumerable stars.
in order to accomplish its work of concentration.  This motion,
throw off one or more rings each, which became the origin of the
professed their intention of conquering.
27,000 feet.  After him Hevelius, an astronomer of Dantzic,
of the lunar disc.  At the same period the examination of the moon
one-forty-ninth part of that of the terrestrial spheroid-- not
unable thoroughly to ascertain.
phenomenon known as the "ashy light," it is explained naturally

The scientific journals, for their part, dealt more especially with
be in error in their estimate by more than seventy miles either way.
face, always invisible to us, it has of necessity three hundred

Night exhibits her different phases; that the moon is _full_
necessity comprised between the twenty-eighth parallels and
Such was then the extent of knowledge possessed by every
Others again, belonging to the doubting class, expressed certain

the majority renounced these vulgar errors, and espoused the true


consider it from a moral point of view.  The cannon-ball,
a huge plate of sandwiches before him.
then, that the 100-pounder Dahlgrens, which carried a distance
take, then, for our starting point, this velocity of 800 yards.
"What mean you?" asked the major.
instruments have acquired great perfection; with certain
"Not so."
apparent distance of five miles; and, in order to be visible,
For instance, during the siege of Constantinople by Mahomet II.,
"Simply cast iron," said General Morgan.

and, rapidly tracing a few algebraical formulae upon paper,
"No! that would be too heavy.  I have better than that to offer."

"A shot of 108 inches in diameter, and twelve inches in

such a mighty mass.  The minutes of the second meeting were
three independent forces:  the resistance of the air, the attraction
Our business, then, is to overcome progressively this action
obliged to adopt.  It must evidently be, then, a gun of great
pounds, the gun would only have a length of two hundred and twenty-


"There is no doubt about that," replied the major; "and as we

"In a moment," replied Maston.  Then, dashing off some
be wanting."
There remained for consideration merely the question of powders.

some figures which will serve as the basis of our calculation.

sufficiently heavy you will not require any powder at all."
major; "its combustion is more rapid than that of the small."
working of the piece more difficult.  I return then to my


6,000,000,000 litres of gas.  Six thousand millions!
is found quite pure in many bodies, especially in cotton, which
"Moreover, pyroxyle is unaltered by moisture-- a valuable
its expansive force is again considerably augmented."
a projectile, and Barbicane would have been stove in if he had

The purely scientific attraction was suddenly intensified by the
Fortunate that it was so, for a meeting between the two men would
of war.

Washington, challenging the president of the Gun Club to break it.
Barbicane returned for answer that, even if Captain Nicholl
mingled a feeling of absolute impotence.  How was he to invent
the shell could not resist the pressure of the gas developed by
impossible), it must inevitably fall back upon the earth, and
fight personally in the cause, resolved to fight with money.


became, then, necessary to determine exactly that spot on the
this decision was to create a rivalry entirely without precedent
it is simply studded with forts raised against the roving Indians.
the honor of having given birth to a Homer, here were two entire
only one-sixth part of the size.
sand and argillaceous earth.


itself to the United States of America!"

This decision, on being made known, utterly crushed the

resolved, finally came the question of finance.  The sum
the strictest sense of the term, and offered not the slightest
and pronounced in favor of the theories of Captain Nicholl.
     At Vienna, with S. M. de Rothschild.
     At Rio de Janeiro, Private Bank.

Her public contributions amounted to the sum of 216,000 florins--
and her fast of Ramadan.  She could not do less than give
The Germanic Confederation pledged itself to 34,285 florins.
contribution of Switzerland to the American work.  One must
established order of things.  In that case it were better to
the following is a statement:
and incipient expenses, would, according to the estimates, absorb
dollars a day to the moment when the moon should again present


steam, the banks of Louisiana speedily disappeared from sight.

horseman carried a carbine slung across his shoulders and
"All right," said the Floridan; "but it is true enough, nevertheless."
that designation, with its dry and parched coasts.  But after


sensitive to these wonders, was in haste to press forward;
at the region of pines!"

the sea, in 27@ 7 N. lat. and 5@ 7 W. long. of the meridian
PICKAXE AND TROWEL
bounties offered by the Gun Club, he had enlisted a choice
first sleepers of a railway fifteen miles in length, intended to
them as follows:  "You are well aware, my friends, of the
At eight oclock the next morning the first stroke of the
Then the iron of the picks struck upon the hard bed of the soil;
resumed their picks and cut away the rock from underneath the wheel
the rock, the bursting of mines, the grinding of the machines,
It became necessary to employ very powerful pumps and

to be avoided, and they are classed among the details with which

a central point, rose 1,200 reverberating ovens, each six feet

New York on the 3rd of May, on the 10th of the same month ascended
the receiving troughs; and the 1,200 converging trenches carried
fastened into the stone lining; after the castings these would
I should prefer its being done privately.  At the discharge of
the other.  At the end of the twelve-hundredth visit they were
oxygen the glowing plates.  The operation, to be successful,
in abeyance for a few minutes in order to facilitate the
horizon, might have believed that some new crater was forming in

the ground burned the soles of the feet within a radius of two
of stone.  Little by little the belt of heat contracted, until
persuasive the arguments of Barbicanes dollars, that by the 3rd
escaped a frightful fall while staring down the tube.  But for
in casting a cannon against which iron plates sixty feet thick
Up to that time, however, it must be confessed, the curiosity

It is needless to say that the first visitors of the Columbiad

pieces into the planetary world."
these two months appeared as long as years!  Hitherto the smallest
pale and his eyes grew dim, on reading the twenty words of

What human being would ever have conceived the idea of such
exclaimed, "It is a grand idea, however!"
of inquirers at length condensed themselves into a compact crowd,
"We must know," roared the impatient voices.
dispatched to the secretary of the underwriters at Liverpool,
the receipt of further orders.  On the 10th of October, at nine
Barbicane, with arms crossed, looked fixedly at the passenger of
jolly, companion.  He was dressed in a suit of ample dimensions,
them, "are only fit to mark the points, while we play the game."

"Yes," replied the president of the Gun Club.
you carefully reflected?"
the whole town, all Florida, all America if you like, and
get it out again.

was a vast plain situated in the rear of the town.  In a few
He exhibited not the slightest embarrassment; he was just as
far that he cannot even understand the difficulties!  It seemed
Is it not evident, then, I ask you, that there will some day appear
Michel Ardan perceived the fact.
millions of miles from the sun!  And yet what is that compared

Up to this point the president of the Gun Club had been
assert, that if these worlds are habitable, they either are,

that fish respire in a medium fatal to other animals; that
animation.  And lastly, were I a theologian, I would tell him

hot or too cold; we are frozen in winter, broiled in summer;


little dried-up man, of an active figure, with an American
Very good, but if Selenites do exist, that race of beings assuredly

can quote, in support of my statement, names which you cannot
"All the better," replied our Frenchman, "if it carries me up to
prefer to bring forward indisputable facts."
defective, because it assumes that the angular diameter of the
astronomers Louville and Halley, watching the eclipse of the
never inferred from them the necessity of a lunar atmosphere.

"Not in the mountains, at all events," returned the unknown,

its center of gravity is situated in the other hemisphere.

"Yes, a thousand; or rather, no, only one!  If you persevere in
"But the heat developed by the rapidity of the projectile in
"But your fall on the moon, supposing you ever reach it?"

Please yourself about this insane expedition!  We need not
restrain himself no longer.  He rose suddenly, and was rushing
The shouts of the immense crowd continued at their highest pitch
between the mysterious personage and the president of the Gun Club.
"So I suspected.  Hitherto chance has never thrown you in my way."

night in endeavoring to discover a means of evading the recoil
president and the captain-- this dreadful, savage duel, in which
got up and opened the door just as it was giving way before the
interrupting him, had hastily put on his clothes; and, in less
they might well covet those wonderful properties of the Indians

"A hunter?  Yes," replied the bushman.

inextricable maze, through which the eye could not penetrate.
not even maneuver!  He is too open, too brave.  He has gone
branches, while some frightened deer fled precipitately before them.
"But can you recognize him?" asked Ardan, whose short sight was
But he and his companion had barely taken fifty steps, when they
its stronghold.
"And a kindhearted one!"
have found him, Michel Ardan tells you this, there will be no
really must kill some one, _shoot me!_ it will do just as well!"


duel, had seen and heard nothing.
departure of the projectile!"
say anything more.

"Yes, certainly," replied the president.


other man; but he managed to keep himself in a state of delightful

"Well, I can only give you the answer which Arago borrowed from
particular, of forty years and upward, and dry in proportion,
of J. T. Mastons.  When the secretary of the Gun Club found





title of "Citizen of the United States of America."

to the highest, running off into escape tubes toward the top of
contrived in the wall of the cone.  This was hermetically closed
light and warm this comfortable vehicle.
destroy the expired carbonic acid; both easy enough to do, by
It is necessary, however, to add that the experiments had
at six oclock P.M., he slid down the projectile, the plate of

At the period when the Gun Club essayed their great experiment,
enlargements scarcely exceeded 6,000 times in round numbers;
After considerable discussion as to the best form and principle

All the necessary apparatus was consequently sent on to the
the commencement of the works, toward the close of September,


submitted to the pressure of the projectile.
acting on the gun-cotton might lead to unhappy results.  This led
point of smoking while surrounded by bales of gun-cotton.
came to a happy termination, Captain Nicholls third bet being
The travelers being desirous of examing the moon carefully

horses, and donkeys, would bear the journey very well, and would
The important question of provisions still remained; it being
completely abandoned by our terrestrial friends; they will take
"I shall reckon upon you!  Then, you see, we shall receive news
There, powerful cranes raised it, and held it suspended over the


The weather was magnificent.  Despite the approach of winter,
_Observer_, not less than five millions of spectators thronged
conversed with trappers and the half-savages of the lakes and
possum, and raccoon steaks.  And as for the liquors which
excitement of the hour.
the United States, and "Yankee Doodle," sung by five million of
T. Maston.  In one word, he was the thorough "Frenchman" (and

The moon advanced upward in a heaven of the purest clearness,
and there escaped the crowd.
obtained a momentary glimpse of the projectile victoriously
height into the air, the glare of flame lit up the whole of
There ensued a terrible tumult; a large number of persons were
from Longs Peak.  The director of the Cambridge Observatory was
extended as far as the Rocky Mountains.  It was a fatality!
but the comparative weakness of their glasses prevented any
gutta-percha cranium.
A NEW STAR
The projectile discharged by the Columbiad at Stones Hill has


confidence; and that was their devoted friend J. T. Maston.
anything; and you will see that, some day, they will come out
ROUND THE MOON
the moon-- by sending to her a projectile.  Their president,
46m. 40s. P.M., it ought to reach the moon four days after its
cast in iron, 900 feet long, and run perpendicularly into
reach the moon, and reconnoiter this terrestrial satellite.
to follow the course of the projectile through space.  All was
But an unforeseen circumstance, viz., the detonation produced
observation on the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th of December.
at 8h. 47m. P.M., the projectile launched by the Columbiad of
the moon would draw it to herself, and the travelers thus attain
a comet, or a satellite; and whoever makes a mistake in such a
One single hypothesis of the observers of Longs Peak could ever
time, while leaning over the gigantic telescope he watched the
continents, were already shut up in the projectile.

the shape of a dome.
Nicholls chronometer marked twenty minutes past ten P.M. when
morals and politics may be discussed, and even solved.
"Michel," said Barbicane, "during the passage we shall have
sure!-- and he waits for the moment when we are encased to make
decide how we can best place ourselves to resist the shock.
"If it is only `much the same thing, I may cheer up," said


"But, by the bye, you have already lost three bets with our
this coat.  "I only ask to be allowed to pay."


"Twenty seconds more!"  Barbicane quickly put out the gas and
THE FIRST HALF-HOUR
Nothing then.  The darkness was profound.  But its cylindro-
metal coffin, bearing three corpses into space?
Then, passing his hand several times across his forehead and
Ardan felt the tide of life return by degrees.  His blood became
began to rub vigorously.  This means, used with judgment,
Still, Barbicane was a long time coming to himself, which
troubled themselves about the projectile; their first thought
prevented them from solving the question.  Perhaps the projectile


"Let us prove it first," said the captain, "and we will


buffers covered with India-rubber stopped up the holes which let

and the window was dark.  Doubt was no longer possible; the
the president drew forth his notebook, tore out a blank leaf,
the following remark from Ardan:
revolved upon its axis, and exhibited the phenomena of all
approached them, and by an optical illusion the projectile

was able to determine the existence of this second satellite and
"How?" said Ardan.
"Yes," said Nicholl; "and if our initiatory speed of twelve
The lunar disc shone with wonderful purity.  Her rays, no longer
were observing it from some spot upon the earth; but its light
observe the earth direct.  The disc, which the force of the
"The earth?" said Barbicane.  "There it is."
traced on the dark background of the sky.  Its light, rendered
period the earth was in its perihelion, and the month of
over their brain.  Was it weariness of body and mind?  No doubt;
"What have you found?" asked Michel Ardan, jumping from his bed.
THEIR PLACE OF SHELTER
them at about seven oclock in the morning of the 2nd of
in the corner till its voice returned with the pangs of hunger.
"Good," said Barbicane:  "I see Eve, but where is Adam?"
They brought the unfortunate dog down with great care.  Its skull
that of the previous evening; but its expanse was still

likeness, and Barbicane is Nicholls.  Beyond us, around us,
laws of hunger.  Michel Ardan, as a Frenchman, was declared
cups of tea with bread and butter, after the American fashion.
rays of the radiant orb struck the lower disc of the projectile
straight line.  Then the _nodes_ coincide with the _phases_ of


three travelers a certain freedom of movement.  The thick window
the last observations of astronomers, the moon had a low, dense,
During the last twelve hours the atmosphere of the projectile had
the glass of which was broken.  An excellent aneroid was drawn
strange phenomena.  In any case it would be interesting to see
extravagant Frenchman had heaped up.  What they were no one knew,
of bulk.  The inspection ended with general satisfaction, when
Way," in the midst of which the sun ranks only as a star of the
theories, and lastly with himself, questioning and answering,

and setting of the sun upon the earth.

But Nicholl and Barbicane were awake.

for, starting from that point, situated about nine-tenths of the
off my head, beginning at my feet, before they could have made

ought to be the initiatory speed of the projectile, and that by
not yet far enough advanced."

"And you pretend, Nicholl," asked Michel, "that by means of
is, to get an equation which shall satisfy all the conditions of

with from the air."

calculate that."
"Yes?" said Barbicane.

"The deuce!"

the window.  Nicholl had crossed his arms, and was examining
Barbicane did not answer, but after a rapid glance at the

"Ah, my brave Nicholl, we are saved!"
not arrive safely?  We are launched; we have no obstacle before
Barbicane and Nicholl made a gesture of denial.
those of the earth, for we cannot doubt that their star is much
"I am sure of it."
even stronger-- these Selenites-- why have they not tried to

some crevasse at that period when the crust of the earth was not
Immediately a good-sized pie was given to the dog, which


fixed on hinges; they can be let down.  We will open one, and
"Only in part.  We make only the oxygen, my worthy Michel; and
is excessive, penetrate the projectile or we shall be frozen to death."
does not go out, might it not happen that the earth might move


"Not at present; because the solar rays, beating directly

raised by a powerful lever, which enabled it to overcome the

the line followed by the projectile, so as to meet it at the
necessitated by their fall on to the moon, were inexhaustible
would diminish by degrees, and it would not have stopped suddenly."
happen, `just to see."
grease the axles of the wheels?  To prevent their heating,
into heat.  Consequently I affirm that, if our projectile had
"According to calculation," replied Barbicane, "the fall would
"They have even calculated," continued the imperturbable Barbicane,
cubic yards English.

temperature can only be that of the planetary space."
"And why," asked Nicholl, "is there no total eclipse?  Does not
itself beyond the cone of pure shadow, and that the sun sends


"Ah!" exclaimed Michel, "what hundred of volumes we might make
When Michel Ardan came down, he went to the side scuttle; and
of the body, which is certainly less than that of the




drew near the end of their journey.  They expected unforseen
scuttles silvered by its rays, they saluted the orb of night
Himalayas, would not be quite in the right place."
slightly altered.  The discharge, mathematically calculated,
in its aim, and being carried beyond the disc should be launched
observing this new world.  They imagined themselves walking
that line where the lunar and terrestrial attractions would
Reiset and Regnauts apparatus worked with great regularity.
some months.  In a word, they behaved like chickens in a coop;

space, all sentimental walks beyond the projectile are forbidden."

never have started."
laws of weight."
greater power of propulsion than that."
they could have quadrupled or quintupled it!" exclaimed Michel,
courageous comrade.  Besides, what is easier?  Is not the
station of Longs Peak, he was trying to find the invisible
cork driven out by carbonic acid; their gestures became annoying,
the same loud tone.
going, I want to know _why_ I am going."

the Selenites!"
"and as I am the congress, you are unanimously elected!"
while five or six hens fluttered like bats against the walls.

absorption of a dozen sandwiches.  He first tried to get some
its pure state producing the gravest disorders in the system.
quickly forgotten.



when it would be sensibly felt upon themselves and the utensils
without ever losing its weight entirely, for the terrestrial
point would be situated at 47/60ths of the whole journey,
2. Or, its speed failing, and unable to reach the point of equal

any trick, the wonderful suspension practiced by Caston and
produced men in whom nothing had any weight, and who weighed
draw us to the moon."
point of equal attraction, its base, being the heavier, will
motion the base was approaching first; the lunar attraction was
"Ah, my worthy friends," he exclaimed, "what progress we should
no more burdens!"
orb exists from whence all laws of weight are banished, you are
"Not at all; instead of jumping one yard high, you will rise
the part of Gulliver, only visit the inferior planets, such as
pigmy, a shrimp!"
on this enormous orb, that an object weighing 70,000 pounds on

weight; a formidable fall, nevertheless, and one against which

The different pieces were fitted without trouble, it being only
it seemed to take a curve parallel to the lunar disc.  The orb
their descent.  We may remember the scene of the meeting held at
Barbicane had accordingly supplied himself with these fireworks,
own velocity also drew it in an oblique direction.  From these
Michel Ardan.
"Then they must have aimed badly?" asked Michel.
that _sooner_ the moon will _not_ be at the point indicated, and
speed, if the direction of the projectile had been right, would
soon see.  Since we are being borne along in space we shall end
predominating, would cause a decided fall.
yards, or about 170 leagues a second.  Under the centripetal


CHAPTER X
question, and the only one, which occupied the minds of these

it involuntarily; but the oblong form of the orb was quite clear.
express trains.  The oblique course of the projectile, from its
northern hemisphere, that which the selenographic maps place
line drawn through the axis of the piece would have passed
They possessed magnifying powers of 100.  They would thus have
FANCY AND REALITY
Contrary to the arrangement followed for that of the Earth and
much more continental than the north pole.  On the latter, there
"clipper" of the Argonauts.  So at least it was in Michel
to determine.  Astronomers, we must allow, have graced these
In the left hemisphere stretches the "Sea of Clouds," where
which the young girl bends; "The Lake of Dreams," reflecting a
things more geographically.  They were learning this new world
were far from the central point which they would have struck,
almost imperceptible to earthly observers.
parallel, north latitude, it seemed rigidly to follow the
a terrestrial map.  As they turn their backs to the north, the
"We are too far off to recognize its nature.  Are these plains
"That is--?" asked Michel.
system, situated in the southern hemisphere, according to Tycho
in activity.  But it is only an extinct one-- like all on that
then, that the general curve of the bottom of these circles

measured twelve miles.


it resembles an immense game of spelikans thrown pellmell.
"My worthy friend," continued the matter-of-fact Barbicane, "it
It was a ringed mountain nine thousand feet high, and one of

Soon Eratosthenes disappeared under the horizon without the

been considerable, to enable it to bear up against her attraction.
vividly marked.  Julius Schmidt pretends that, if the
the reflection of a sheet of steel freshly polished.  These colors
situated near the Hercynian mountains, on the borders of the

these furrows, generally isolated, measured from 400 to 500
as the "Sea of Serenity."



formation of craters and circles, for several have introduced
surface; but in the void in which the projectile floated no

parallel, the distance was reduced to 300 miles.  To the left
the equator, toward the eastern border of the orb.
becoming quite mountainous.  The glasses brought them to within
to the cold of space.
distances of the different plains.  A lunar landscape without
Michel Ardan wanted to open one of the scuttles and throw


fictitious light, an expensive brilliancy which the sun then refused.
"My friends, it is neither the fault of the sun nor of the moon;
The "strange" shadow so dear to Victor Hugos pen bound them on
the antipodes, imagine to yourself the astonishment of a
inhabitants of the visible face are singularly favored by nature,
"It follows, then," continued Barbicane, without knitting his


moon is lit by the sun, it is because the moon is full, that is

will inhabit the visible face.  I like the light."
had been enormous, he could have understood that the fall would
Air, that medium of sound, was wanting to transmit the groanings
and Secchi, never found themselves in circumstances so favorable
dense and of different degrees of humidity, produces

No, indeed! we have no right to complain; nature does wonders in
"In any case it is cold," said Michel.  "See! the steam of the
with an ordinary one, and then Barbicane prepared to use it.
but a stump frozen and deformed by the frightful cold."
But in order not to expose ourselves to the loss of our
the surrounding temperature.  Then it was rapidly pulled in.

quietly installed in their own study.

Perhaps it was rapidly leaving the disc, so that it would soon

"But then," asked Michel, "I shall be curious to know how our
"Just so," replied Barbicane.  "With a certain speed it will

They were deep in a scientific discussion.  What curve would

remained that, whether hyperbolically or parabolically borne away,
But observations had now become very difficult.  the dampness of
I allow that the moon, immersed in the suns rays, will not be
Yes, evidently.  As to the invisible side, we could have visited
place in the relative position of the vehicle; and Barbicane
This point of mark was a luminous brightness, which Nicholl
"But, then," said Michel Ardan, "in order to maintain that
was taking it far from the point indicated by the eruption.
destiny of the lunar world was uppermost.  He was seeking to

enormous proportions.
have given themselves up for lost.
and irradiated space with their fires.  Every size, every color,

dazzling magic of the fires of space; and, lastly, on the surface
hastily discerned, was again buried in impenetrable night.
for the travelers.  They were to them so many sandbanks upon
But the projectile must describe a curve unalterably determined

moon when in one of her octants.
"After having passed the north pole," replied Michel.  "We have


from east to west.  The radiant orb was saluted by a triple hurrah.
from the lunar surface, in order to follow the slightly
On their capriciously formed ridge appeared dazzling sheets, as
witness to this great fact in his selenographic observations.
white, from the want of diffusion of light.
of death, without its being possible even to say that life had ever
supported the conduit of an aqueduct; in another part the sunken
lay extended one of the finest circles of lunar orography,
cannot break.  Mythologists could well have made it the mouth of hell.


these cataclysms?"
The projectile was still advancing, and this movement did
a glory carved for Plutos head, a star launched by the
Aristarchus and Copernicus; but it is of all the most complete
of perspective disappears, and all proofs become white-- a
gigantic terraces.  They appeared to be higher by 300 or 400
for a citadel; the whole overlooked by a central mountain of

Under his eyes ran in all directions luminous furrows, raised at
currents of lava congealed by the cold; an opinion, however,

The shock which produced that rent must have some from the
luminous gleams in the double irradiation of sun and moon, must

hours-- the moon does not seem habitable to me, nor does she
nothing seemed to us to move on the moons surface.  The presence

December may be seen.

"I believe it," said Nicholl.

"Astonish us?" said Michel Ardan.
"Because that equality has only been determined by
utterly insoluble.  Do not let us enter upon them.  Let us only
"By cooling?"
"Most probably."
"But speak, then, my clumsy savant," exclaimed Michel Ardan,
discussion, put the second question, which had just been

This change, which Barbicane verified, did not fail to surprise them.
"And when arrived at this dead point, what will become of us?"
the orb of night."
the impossible?"

"We ask no better, my worthy Michel," replied Barbicane, "but
go much quicker."
"Breakfast," answered the cool, audacious Frenchman, who always
any atmosphere, for the specific weight of these different objects
of this general brilliancy Tycho shone prominently like a sun.
nearest to the earth in her perigee, and farthest from it in
"By Jove!" he exclaimed, "I must admit we are down-right simpletons!"

and with the influence of our rockets we may perhaps
they themselves had solved in the negative.  No! the moon is not
7th-8th of December.  So that, if nothing interfered with its
"What a motion!" exclaimed Michel Ardan.
"Certainly," said Michel Ardan, finding himself alone, "these

filling his post on the Rocky Mountains.  If he could see the


communication with the rockets.  No detonation was heard in
turning to the lunar disc!"

the height of which is only 200 feet, will arrive on the
called the moon!"

favorable for laying telegraphic cables.  A level bottom, like
who was superintending the operation.

long peninsula which stretches down the coast of Mexico.

December, she was in exactly 27@ 7 north latitude, and 41@ 37
"They have been gone ten days," said Lieutenant Bronsfield
see my brave countrymen encamped at the bottom of some valley,
"Beg pardon, lieutenant," said the midshipman, "but cannot
"And how?"

if it were allowed, half of the earths inhabitants would
entail some hours work.  According to the commanders orders,



But Captain Blomsberry had assembled his officers, and "with
alone could spread these important news fast enough.

given north-northeast, and the corvette, wearing, steered at
them to land.
the sub-director of the Cambridge Observatory, Massachusetts.
American experiment.  We will not attempt to picture the effect
the gigantic reflector of Longs Peak, and also that it was held
the corvette.  It was difficult to answer this argument, for
soon cross the whole of Central America, took them as far as St.
called by the English "front view."  This arrangement subjected
on the night of the 5th of December, they saw the vehicle which
Belfast affirming that the projectile could not be seen, J. T.

gestures which his formidable hook rendered very unpleasant.

He reappeared at the upper orifice without hurt.
Francisco, having killed five horses on the road.


On that account Engineer Murchison hastened to San Francisco,
How great were the chances against them, the projectile being
throughout the entire world by means of wires and electric cables.

been recognized.

without heeding these dangers, took their places in the

turn by optical illusions which almost broke their hearts.
the corvette.

"The air, possibly," answered J. T. Maston resolutely, "but

Commander Blomsberry, J. T. Maston, and the delegates of the Gun
and on the other that a simple gutta-percha cap covered his
the projectile only weighs 19,250 pounds!"
The boats were put to sea.  J. T. Maston and his friends had
At that moment they heard a clear and merry voice, the voice of

to be received as the prophet Elias would be if he came back

their turn to impose some limit on that selenographic science,
and all served alike.  At certain hours, successively
language, the train left the platform of Baltimore.  It traveled
Washington station, re-entered Baltimore, where for four days
To such questions no answer can be given.  But knowing the bold
were nominated beforehand!
>working from a time-line.  For example, I think he has the time for
>speaker can find a French edition, it might be nice to see if the
Page #s and a full reformating has been done.  Line widow/orphans
>todays space program.  As "literary" history, I note that Heinleins


>Typographic conventions in the book:
>My typographic conventions:

>The book uses ligatures for ff fi fl ffi ffl; I have simply spelled these


permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
THE ABANDONED
thrown on Lincoln Island. During that time, notwithstanding the
insignificance, immediately took possession of their minds. The sudden

these questions are of too much importance to be allowed to remain
"At least," said Neb seriously, "if Pencroft has not had--"
summit of Mount Franklin, it had been inhabited, we should have seen

that in five days the work will be finished!"
cause great uneasiness amongst the colonists.

they had only to be barked, which was the most difficult thing of all,
accustomed quota, which might have fed all the colony in Lincoln
returned Herbert.
Harding appears rather to fear than desire the presence of human
forest near the Mercy, remarkable for its beautiful trees. There,
arrangement of which made the ascent of the kauri easy, and in a few
bank of trees hid the shore, it was possible that a vessel, especially
For an instant Herbert thought he could perceive a slight smoke in the
Herbert and Neb were fortunate enough to capture a magnificent
turtle on its back, and it cannot possibly get away. Take your spear
In fact, the heart of friend Pencroft could not fail to be rejoiced,
deemed superfluous, to wedge up the animal with great stones, after
"It appears so," replied Herbert, who could not understand it at all,


incident.
returned the sailor.


by following the shore as far as the first point at which the rocks of
security as if it was ascending the tranquil current of the Mercy.
Tadorns Fens.
giants arm stretched out from a leafy sleeve.
canoe reached the extremity of the point, and Pencroft was preparing

"But whats in this chest?" cried Pencroft, with very natural
convey it to Granite House, where we can open it easily and without
examined the shore for several hundred steps. No other articles or
barrels, hermetically sealed, but which sounded hollow and empty, were
passengers had taken the precaution to buoy it up by means of this
oars, so as to facilitate the moving of the chest, towing which the
its inventory. Pencroft did not try to hide that he was greatly

chest contained tools, weapons, instruments, clothes, books; and this
apparatus, object-glass, plates, chemicals, etc.
weapons, instruments, clothes, utensils, books--nothing is wanting! It
prepared this chest and threw it overboard."

haste.
There was nothing, therefore, on these different articles by which
held in great esteem, for in proportion as they approached the bottom

going to bed, Herbert asked the engineer if he would not read them

    -- A Waterfall -- The Night Encampment.
take with them, but also of those which they might have by chance to

settlers could venture into the vast forest with some chance of
floated swiftly along between the high banks without its being
groups belonging to the same family, amongst others one in particular,
scarcely more than three feet high, which produced brownish grains.
more will be wanting in our island!"
Mercy continued to the north-west, towards the spurs of Mount
off by itself.
Lories are better food than the jacamar, the flesh of which is rather
creepers hanging from one trunk to another in the midst of tangled
they would have been obliged to cut a path through the thick wood with

The ground at the foot of the eucalypti was carpeted with grass, and
"And I may add," said Herbert, "that the eucalyptus belongs to a
The lad was allowed to run on, and he delivered his little botanical


"but now we must continue our voyage and push on as far as the river
journey, resolved to camp at the place where any further navigation
massacre. This was prudent, for the monkeys, or apes rather, appearing
"In a quarter of an hour," said the sailor, "we shall be obliged to
of day, we will leave the canoe, and in two hours I hope we shall

was only sleeping to think of. But, as roarings of rather a suspicious
    The Reason the Tide was not felt -- A woody Shore -- Reptile
of Mount Franklin, and as the volcano arose in the north at a distance
prevented their growth.
And certainly, pedestrians, hindered at each step by bushes, caught by
was deep and clear, but it was absolutely unnavigable.
"All right!" said Pencroft.
sailor.
The fishing did not take five minutes for the crayfish were swarming in
only been a few miles distant. Now, this effect was not produced, and
was a little in front, suddenly stopped and exclaimed--
forest trees seemed to be as firmly planted as in the interior of the
space of nearly two miles, then the trees became scarcer, and beyond
shore as far as the eye could reach. But the engineer would take nothing

of the Mercy. It would therefore be necessary to pass the night on the
camp. Amongst the last trees of the forest of the Far West, the boy
joint, useful cups are obtained, which are much in use among the
"I will also add that the pith of the young stalks, preserved in

is to say, it measured five feet from the extremity of its head to the
collected itself for a spring, but at that moment a shot struck it in

the reporter, "and no wild beasts will dare to cross the threshold."
or rather, a series of reports, broke the silence! The noise was caused,
    Proposal to return by the Southern Shore -- Configuration of

presented no good anchorage, he wished to seek on the south what they
be at least another ten miles."


plenty of game. Forward!"
bringing to light the least trace of any old or recent landings; no
Claw Cape.

At one oclock the colonists arrived at the other side of Washington
After half an hours rest, the settlers resumed their journey, and not

bag.

leaving any trace?" cried the reporter.


forwards, not like a dog who searches at random, but like a being
"Ho, splendid! capital!"
"I beg your pardon!" returned Pencroft.
Island that the balloon, after having made its last bound into the
circle and the anchor. The case, except for the fracture, was in good
"In the meantime, we must put it in a safe place," said Neb.
At six oclock, all was stowed away, and after having given the creek
The distance between Flotsam Point and Granite House was another four
constructing a sort of raft, on which to make the passage of the
"A canoe!" cried he.


proceeded towards the ladder of Granite House.
    Arrows -- The Captains Project -- An unexpected Explanation

lose patience, "I will give them a hail, and they must answer."
Be that as it may, forgetting their fatigue in the singularity of the
Pencroft, unable to make up his mind to retire from the spot.
could not be helped, however, for in some way or other at that moment
of the inexplicable circumstance which baffled even their intelligence

brigands, robbers, sons of John Bull!".
arrow so that it should pass between the first rounds of the ladder
between the two last rounds.

So saying, the sailor, raising his piece, took a rapid aim at one of

the line broke and the ladder remained firm. The case was really
will think we have gone quite away and will show themselves again. Let
their post.
"But we must drive these vagabonds out somehow," cried the sailor. "We
hiding this opening by raising the waters of the lake, for the

"Hullo!" cried the sailor, "this is queer!"
have been who sent us that down?"

The settlers then approached the ape and gazed at it attentively. He
The one which had been seized in the hall of Granite House was a great
jealous."
The orang replied by a little grunt which did not show any anger.
give you no wages at first, but we will double them afterwards if we

they were about to be attacked from another direction? This was the

As to the enclosure, it was Cyrus Hardings intention to establish it



which had hollowed out a bed for itself across the plateau and shore,
by this fresh discharge of its waters, but Cyrus Harding had

Happily there was no want of tools with which to shape the wood, nor
accustomed to his new masters, whose movements he always watched with
would be necessary to take a cart to Port Balloon, and consequently,
"And prepare our second cornfield!" cried the sailor with a triumphant
As to birds, some scarecrows, due to Pencrofts ingenious brain, were
complete the enclosure the bed of the stream on the beach was
masters, and evinced no wish to escape. He was a gentle animal, though
accustomed to the borders of the lake. Some belonged to the Chinese
dwelling, and showed more disposition to domesticate themselves than
the place of the horse, ass, or ox? That was the question.
female, of a fine shape, dove-coloured, the legs and tail white,
The sailor, without frightening the animals, crept through the grass
and forests. They were then seen following the water-barrier which
but once harnessed they reared and could with difficulty be held in.
beach. The onagas being unharnessed, were thence led to their stable,
The first week of January was devoted to the manufacture of the linen
way that the cotton, having got rid of the varnish, resumed its
With the beginning of the year 1866 the heat was very great, but the
he employed granulated iron, which was easy to manufacture. These

its force is four times that of ordinary powder.
About this time the settlers cleared three acres of the plateau, and
renewed, and furnished excellent molluscs. Besides that, the fishing,

precede the males and make a great noise through the fresh water. A
the greatest patience and even extreme zeal in instructing his pupil,
"Jup, a plate!"
carried on his shoulder like a gun. If they wished to gather some

agile animals from leaping over. This enclosure would be large enough
for besides the palisade, Cyrus Harding built large sheds, in which
wood, whilst the two cavaliers and Top galloped in a radius of half a
to complain. There was no doubt that the flock would prosper, and that
Gideon Spilett was so anxious to clear their domain.
the harvests would be abundant.
comb, caruncle and epidermis being black. So far, everything had
What was the result of the War of Secession? It could not have been
kingdoms of Nature.

or everything in the rooms would have been drenched. On seeing these
both for the toilet and the kitchen, particularly buttons, the want of
Pencroft, "never any improper reply! What a servant, Neb, what a
All were indeed wonderfully well. Herbert had already grown two inches
which belonged to the same sex as its mother, and which throve
not as yet had time to fulfil.
"But you have no machine at your disposal."
cylinder with paddles, which was joined on the exterior with a strong
Cyrus Harding attempted to manufacture glass and he at first put the
means of a long, thin piece of iron rolled up like the barrel of a
And Herbert, swelling out his cheeks, blew so much and so well into

them heartily. Now, as Harding was not a sportsman, and as, on the
"It is a cycas revoluta, of which I have a picture in our dictionary

House with an ample supply of cycas stems. The engineer constructed a
their native land, had no reason to complain. They were so well suited
creeping up from the horizon. Some cups of the infusion of elder


Harding had operated with so much skill that his error did not exceed

"About a hundred and fifty miles to the north-east," replied Harding.
    new Plant, more Pleasant than Useful -- Whale in Sight -- A
These details settled, it was agreed that since the fine season would
had at first drawn the model of his ship on paper. Besides, he was
measured his treasure.

pocket-compass, for the sun scarcely pierced through the thick
West, when the reporter, preceding Herbert a few paces, arrived in a
"Yes, and though it may not be of the first quality, it is none the
much precaution as if Pencroft had been the most vigilant and severe

whales of the southern hemisphere are met with in the greatest
the telescope, but watched all the animals movements. The cetacean,

left their guns, Pencroft threw down his axe, and Harding and Neb
feet long, a giant of the species, probably not weighing less than a
side, and this one might even have been struck in the north of the


the fat, which would insure for a long time a store of stearine and
However, before returning to the dockyard, Cyrus Harding conceived the
"Well! I do call that ingenious!" said Pencroft.
On that day, after dinner, just as he was about to leave the table,
"A pipe, then?"
"O divine Providence! sacred Author of all things!" cried the sailor.
for one moment. You must share your gratitude with Herbert, who
    -- The Bones -- To what Use an Albatross may be put -- Fuel
machine to spin the wool, nor loom to weave it, was obliged to proceed
grease. This cleaning was done in vats filled with water, which was
waterfall on the beach possessed to move a fulling-mill.
formed equally suitable either for garments or bedclothes. It was
a comparatively small vessel, over unknown seas, could not but cause
"Only to leave it for a few days," replied Pencroft, "only for a few

have seen our tight-rigged little craft, when you have observed how
tried. The bent whalebones, imprisoned in a case of ice, and covered
into the sea a letter enclosed in a bottle, which currents might
him that they should not neglect this opportunity of attempting to
it to forward it to the office of the _New York Herald_. This little
House, mending clothes and different occupations, amongst others
smoke, they could hear the storm howling without. Their comfort would
"Stopped! And by what?"
coal will be entirely consumed?"

"But what will they find?" asked Pencroft. "Can you guess, captain?"
complete at the same time. Yes, my friends, I believe that water will

agitation, and, singular to say, the two animals appeared more uneasy


first week of the month of August the weather became more moderate,

Why did Top so often run round this opening? Why did he utter such
descent.
which was then perfectly calm. Neither at its level nor in any other

being literally loaded with game; indeed, they had as much as four men
"It will be you then, Mr. Spilett, who will help me?"
Granite House unless to look after the poultry-yard. The dwelling was
the halliards, shrouds, and sheets, etc. The blocks were manufactured

continued to bark more furiously than ever.
"They have nearly reached the plateau," said the reporter.

"Forward!" shouted the sailor.
the Mercy, it was sufficient to oppose the culpeux on the narrow bank
"They must not pass!" shouted Pencroft.
fury, flying at the throats of the foxes and strangling them
the bridge, which Neb ran immediately to raise. When day had
deprived of his weapon he had been overpowered by numbers, and his
Jup, carried by Neb and Pencroft, was placed in the lift, and only a

of being somewhat of a gourmand, and Neb had never done anything to
is too often wanting in reasoning beings, to keep the orang from any

filled it himself, lighted it with a glowing coal, and appeared to be
"Yes," replied Neb, "what a pity he was born dumb!"
15th of September. For calking the seams they made oakum of dry
chose a straight young fir, with no knots, and which he had only to
vegetable stores of Granite House.
after many propositions had been discussed, the votes were all in
which had originated with him, although on the sailors advice he had
remarkably fast pair of heels, according to Pencrofts mode of
"How beautiful it is!" cried Herbert.

a longer voyage; but you know I should see you set off to Tabor Island
Island."

glass, was only rippled now and then by passing gusts.
"A bottle!"



and why not here as well as anywhere else?"
running rapidly towards Claw Cape.
present wind it would not take more than forty-eight hours to make
The evening was occupied in transporting on board the _Bonadventure_
fifteen months."
the horizon.
quarter until the 16th, appeared in the twilight and soon set again.
did the day of the 12th of October. A south-easterly direction was
"It is not quite so deserted as all that," replied Pencroft.
day, if the calculation had been correct and the course true, they
And it was impossible that Pencroft should be mistaken, it was evident
At eleven oclock the _Bonadventure_ was not more than two miles off,
water, whilst he held the halliard in his hand, ready to lower the
of about two hundred and fifty or three hundred feet which rose at a
sea-swallows, similar to those of Lincoln Island, fluttered around
sight.
"Indeed," answered Herbert, "nothing here betrays the presence of
distance.
believe that Tabor Island was not or was no longer inhabited. Perhaps,
rapidly increased. Herbert resolved to catch one or two living, and
"The document," said Herbert, "only spoke of one castaway."





which the damp and yellow coverlets proved that it had not been used
Herbert.
"If he had quitted the island he would have taken away his weapons and
it. The door closed, Pencroft, Herbert, and Spilett remained there,
before, and to search the most secret recesses of the islet! The
The hut had been built of planks, and it was easy to see that these
a common name for ships, and I could not say if she was English or
a mile. They set out on their walk, gazing into the wood and thickets
had perished. It was therefore more for the traces of a dead than of a
"I think so too," returned Gideon Spilett; "and these arms and tools
to-morrow at daybreak. The wind seems to me to be likely to shift to
Many specimens of the porcine race fled before them, and these
"Run!" exclaimed Pencroft.

[Illustration: HERBERT IN DANGER]

understand or even to hear. And yet on looking into his eyes, the
him some gleam of intelligence."

impression on him! Perhaps a spark would be sufficient to revive his
soon he turned away and the look of intelligence faded. Evidently
Pencroft offered him something to eat, but he pushed away the cooked
"About what age is he?" asked the lad.
did what we could."


emerged from the hatchway as if his sailors instinct had suddenly
sleep. They kept a sharp look-out, for either Lincoln Island
bearing too much to the north, altered his course and steered towards


wonderfully well. We will tell you all about it."
"Living?"
"And thats just the point," added Pencroft, "I dont know if we have
brutishness of the unfortunate man began only a few months back?"
Herbert then in a few words related the incidents of the voyage, and
But Cyrus Harding approaching, placed his hand on his shoulder with a
of Granite House, from which, however, he could not escape. He was led

your search, and we should not have had a new companion."
where they soon became at home.

rocks, seems to me to be just the harbour we want."
"Yes, my brave Pencroft," answered the engineer, "but on condition,
reporter wondered if the reason of the unfortunate man had ever been
been clothed more suitably, after having got rid of the rag which
most often of things belonging to the navy, which must interest a
to satisfy, better fed, better clothed, it was natural that his
The calm of the stranger was deep, as has been said, and he even

The stranger rose immediately. His eyes were fixed on Cyrus Harding,
rippled on the sand.
not quitting those of his patient.
an instant as if for a spring, but almost immediately he stepped back,
    Disappearance -- Cyrus Hardings Confidence -- Construction
strangely determined not to speak to the colonists; for one evening,
with sobs, as if overburthened!
Harding who was observing him from a little distance, saw that tears
longer contain himself!... At last he folded his arms, then, in a
Then he rushed to the side of the plateau which overlooked the sea,
eyes he is absolved."



it is not impossible that those who left him on the island may return
it!"
"If this man had been left for twelve years on Tabor Island, one may
"That is not absolutely impossible," replied the reporter.
was found in a perfect state of preservation."
losing a moment, without taking a minutes rest, but always in a
he had quite resumed the wild aspect of his worst days.
stolen, murdered--that I am not a wretch--an accursed being--only fit
they returned alone.
In the meanwhile, works of all sorts were continued, as well on
On the 15th of November, the third harvest was gathered in. How
built on Prospect Heights. The building of this presented no more
The frame was to rest on a pivot supported with strong timbers, so
bolting machine, which by the operation of sifting, separates the bran
"Pooh! our mill would only go the faster!"
Island. On this morning two or three bushels of wheat were ground, and

Harding and the reporter were occupied at the Chimneys in making soda,
the forest, and bounded up the opposite bank.
The jaguar fell. The stranger kicked away the body, and was about to

first time. Perhaps this history recounted, he would tell his own.

    Still alone -- The Strangers Request -- The Farm established
What was the mystery of his life? Would the stranger one day speak of
appearing at meals, sleeping under the trees in the plateau, never
On the 10th of December, a week after his return to Granite House,


this cordial appellation, "you must let us judge what it will be best
carried to the corral.
companion was to leave them. Not wishing to trouble him by their
The engineer rose.
was in this posture that in a hoarse voice, speaking like some one who
in English, German, and French, had been found in the Irish sea, and
everything to find the captain. He communicated with Mary and Robert

surprise of the bystanders, one of his servants came forward and
that he, Ayrton, was the sole survivor of the _Britannia_.
Austin, proceeded to Melbourne, there to await Lord Glenarvans
leader of the escaped convicts; and if he boldly maintained that the
necessary, then, to get Lord Glenarvan to order her to leave Melbourne
accomplishment of these terrible projects.

vessel!
the English authorities. Ayrton remained mute.

be neither lost nor forgotten, as was Captain Grant. Unworthy as you
tools, or seeds.
remorse!





preceded his being left on the Island had made it known to him."
"But has Ayrton told the truth?" asked the sailor.

"I think nothing, I know nothing!" interrupted Cyrus Harding. "I am
unaccountable which has happened here, and that reason I shall
island should be subject to a surveillance of some sort, and that
companions.
seeing ourselves some day rolling along on a railway!"
in use, its beam moved with extreme power would serve to stretch out
with manufacturing his battery.
Cyrus Harding, after mature consideration, decided to manufacture a

support the wire. A few days after, the wire was extended, ready to
pole. If the current was interrupted the magnet immediately became
This mode of communication presented two very real advantages;
fourth harvest had been admirable, and it may be supposed that no one
At this period the little colony was extremely prosperous.
anything to fear from the heat, for the suns rays scarcely penetrated

This apparatus, provided with a powerful object-glass, was very
rocks, the glade and the corral, with the spurs of the mountain in the
not to be described, and his portrait was lifelike!
had already made its appearance. In fact Herbert, looking early from
"But the thermometer marks fifty-eight degrees!" observed Gideon
and dispersed in the air in such innumerable flakes that the light of
before, the castaways from the air had been thrown upon Lincoln
    comes on -- New Incident.

had so little hope of ever seeing again.
way; but twelve hundred miles is a pretty long way, and the nearest

expiated, and I believe that he will return."



leave Lincoln Island in some way or another, it will not be because we
A complete survey of the coast had not yet been made, and the
appeared propitious for an excursion.
End. Of the ninety miles which the perimeter of the island measured,
at anchor near the shore.

sinister aspect of this shore from the summit of Mount Franklin, for
possessed. Every caprice of nature, still more varied than those of
Perhaps some cave, which it would be advisable to explore, existed


explored."

"And what distance is it to the Cape, captain?"

would be much more convenient for sailors."
of the 19th of October, on Prospect Heights."

his prognostications. The wind rose, and from a fresh breeze it soon
enormous masses of water falling on the deck, might injure her, if her
doubted that it was lighted by the engineers hand; and here was Cyrus
oclock in the morning, the _Bonadventure_, weathering the North
cape protects that of the south in a way which would make the entrance
"Right into its mouth, my honest Neb!" replied Herbert; "but you are
And the sailor sounded with a long cord, which served him as a


along the coast.
A complete exploration of the coast of the island had now been made,
"But are you quite sure of having seen it? Was it not a partial

"Unless, being unconscious--" said Pencroft.


"When you were returning from Tabor Island, Pencroft," continued the

not being able to finish his sentence.
Harding also reminded his companions of the singular behaviour of Top

spend the bad season with them in Granite House, where he would be
strengthen those on the shore, which disappeared under the foaming
cross the stream, which besides, when frozen, offered them an easy
from Granite House more than two or three miles.
Top and Jup themselves no longer growled round the well or gave any
It may be remembered that Gideon Spilett and Herbert had, at different
obtained, he went away to fix it by means of the chemicals deposited


besides being translated, with more or less despatch, into other
Floating City, 1874; The Blockade Runners, 1874; Around the World in
Fire, 1886; Mathias Sandorf, 1886; Keraban the Inflexible, 1887; The

of the island, on that deserted sea!

constantly contending against a cruel nature for their miserable
have been visible.  However, it was certain that the island, overtopped
other.  A hundred and fifty miles only separated them in longitude, and

"No doubt, my boy," answered the engineer smiling, "but it would be
"Well," said Pencroft, "suppose this vessel comes and anchors there a
natural port, fresh water, roads, a telegraph, a dockyard, and
wind was favourable for bringing her towards the island, and, the sea
Ayrton at first paled slightly, and for a moment his eyes became dim;
"No," said he, "no! it cannot be the _Duncan_!"

calm manner.  Was not his country that where his master was?  As to the
Bay, near Port Balloon--a provoking circumstance, for it was already
whoever she may be, that the island is inhabited.  To neglect the
rigged as a brig.  The question was, whether a chimney could be
"And yet," added the sailor, "a flag is floating from her peak, but I
"It is not the American flag," said Pencroft from time to time, "nor the
and they had now good reason for considering her to be a suspicious
pirates!  It was that which the _Duncan_ would have carried, had the
"Oh," answered Pencroft, "she is sheltered in Port Balloon, and I defy
these wretches endeavour to seize Lincoln Island, we shall defend it--


with them?
shore.  Nothing could be seen of the ship, all her lights being

dropped anchor at a short distance from the island, and it was evident
taking possession.  Harding knew now that the vessel was well-armed.

"Why not, sir?"

"Alas!"


the brig, from which the lights were reflected in the water.  He thought
"Our brig is a famous acquisition."
tools of all sorts, destined for one of the Sandwich Islands.  All his
of an establishment in which were lodged the most intractable convicts
pirate, and well-known to Ayrton!
no communication yet existed between the convicts and Lincoln Island.
be necessary to fight, to destroy every one of these scoundrels,
among the convicts stretched here and there, he made the round of the
companions an account of the mission with which he had charged himself,
possession of him.  Then he was seized with an irresistible desire to
loaded and primed.  Nothing more was needed to accomplish the work of


But was flight still possible?  It was doubtful, yet Ayrton resolved to

yet neither Ayrton nor Pencroft had reappeared.  Was the islet invaded?
their situation was serious.  The pirates had been alarmed.  They knew
"Yes! six! without counting--"
The night passed without incident.  The colonists were on the _qui
believe that the inhabitants of the island are numerous, and
the ammunition.  Fire often, but with a sure aim.  We have each eight or

to prevent it, and also if they saw that they were on the point of being

The sinister black flag floated from the peak.
at them, who had killed one and wounded two others, escaped their shot?
observed on board the brig.  Evidently Bob Harvey was hesitating.  Even
land, for in the latter case they would have come in larger numbers.
the coast.  About thirty pirates, scattered in the rigging, followed

the colonists posted on the islet, in such a way, that whatever their
Twenty minutes after the first shots were fired, the boat was less than
fire, then, rounding the northern point of the islet with the two
could get alongside the _Speedy_.  Frightful cries were heard when they
well-directed balls threw its crew into disorder.  Then, Pencroft and
the ambush there, they fled in the direction of Flotsam Point, out of

tide to enter the channel, with the risk of grounding at low tide, it is
yours and Spiletts rifles which must speak now."
the latter to be supplied with long range rifles, they on their side did

without giving a sign of life; but not without some emotion.  What could
would not venture his ship into the channel, and that he would keep
reconnoitre the channel, and she boldly entered it.
The reporter and his companion had judged it best to abandon the post at

"What would be the use of that, Pencroft?" replied Harding.  "No.  We
post, although it was not occupied, and on the Chimneys.  The rocks were
They could not oppose any obstacle to these missiles, nor protect the



arrested them.

emotion--
hauling up the spars onto the sand, and then in spreading the sails,
would be well worth the trouble!"
"Miraculous is the word," repeated Pencroft, "for it must be
besides there are so few planks and timbers torn out.  It seems as if
"Nonsense, Neb," answered Pencroft, "you did not look at the right
Cyrus Harding did not answer.
unknown rock.
brig went down, and had not again been seen, having doubtless been
the beginning of the stem, the sides of the brig were frightfully torn.
there has been one, has produced singular effects!  It has split the

up the barrels and chests.  The boat received them and transported them
interior arrangements had been destroyed, especially towards the bows.
This, in fact, was just what had happened.  They extricated from amongst
Several hours had passed during these researches, and the tide began to
Most of them contained clothes, which, as may be believed, were well

The morning came, however, without the convicts having attempted any
enthusiastic in his projects, already spoke of constructing a battery to
carefully searched the lockers of the poop, Harding did not discover any
strolling on the beach, had not found a piece of a thick iron cylinder,
there are no rocks in the channel."


her.  The _Speedy_ had not been able to withstand a torpedo that would
possessed of prodigious power, could render them.  Ayrton is indebted to

The reporters reasoning was just, and every one felt it to be so.
"Master," then said Neb, "my idea is, that we may search as long as we

"Captain Harding," replied Ayrton, "I can give you no better advice in
wretch you knew, and who made known to you that there was an unfortunate
was no want of room in Granite House, in which they might have housed
through the granite cliff.  From this height they commanded all Union
making the experiment, we ought to employ, not the ordinary powder, the
obtained under the condition that the projectile should be impelled with
Since they had been taken from the water, the sailor had bestowed great
into the sea at a distance which could not be calculated with
to try its extreme range.  Then, all standing aside for fear of its

And with a slow step he walked away.

"Pencroft, think of Ayrton!" said Herbert, taking the sailors hand.


but were to be on their guard.  After all, the island was large and
CHAPTER SIX.
tools in order to facilitate the organisation of the encampments.  One

in order at the corral.

"These gentlemen," he observed, "landed on the south coast, and if they
crossed, he raised the bridge.  It was agreed that a gun-shot should
Port Balloon was so well hidden amongst high rocks that it could

voluntarily?  Can he leave the island if he likes?  Is he here still?
"What, it was not you?" asked Gideon Spilett.
has been run out, and its service is no longer at the hawse-hole.  I


is a bad place for a vessel, and the sea is heavy there."
"Well, my boy," replied Pencroft, "not finding her here, they would not
make an artificial harbour there by means of dams.  In this way, the
himself.
telegraphic apparatus, so that it works no longer?"
"Off to the corral," said he.
the corral, and if they did not find Ayrton, search the neighbouring

"The wire is broken!"

return the evening before, had not reappeared.  In short, it was not

Herbert, struck by a bullet, lay stretched on the ground.
Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett ran to Herbert.
seconds, before he had even time to fire his second barrel, he fell,
poor boy who was suffering beneath their eyes.  Gideon Spilett had not
blood having been staunched with handkerchiefs, it was bathed with cold
"But the heart?" asked Harding.
In the meanwhile, Gideon Spilett endeavoured to collect his ideas, and
dressed without delay.  It did not appear necessary to Gideon Spilett


Harding approved entirely, and it was decided that the two wounds should
Gideon Spilett and Cyrus Harding reasoned thus with their simple good
stupor.  He opened his eyes, he recognised Cyrus Harding, the reporter,
again that you will save Herbert!"
and the reporter consulted as to what it would be best to do.
Nor could they see traces of any struggle, any devastation, either in
all these misfortunes!"
"He must not come!" returned Cyrus Harding quickly.  "He would be
since he has had any news of us!  He will be sure to come!"

to Tops collar in a conspicuous position.

compresser always wet.  Spilett, seeing there was nothing he could do at
The engineer opened the gate, and seeing smoke a hundred feet off in the

therefore, for living in the corral, of which the provisions would last
the unfortunate man, and--the rest may be easily imagined!

had a more direct action on the healing.  The suppuration was much less
In ten days, on the 22nd of November, Herbert was considerably better.
"And have they not been seen again?" asked Herbert.
aggravated,--if, for example, the ball had remained in his body, if his
not a time come when all their science would be at fault?  They were

abandoned the island?  Had he in his turn succumbed?
ACCEPTED--SEVERAL SORTIES BY GIDEON SPILETT--A RAG OF CLOTH--A MESSAGE--

against the pirates, was thoroughly discussed on the 29th of November by
"But is he equal to five?" asked the engineer.
engineer.  "Besides, observe that if both of you left the corral I
whilst the other three went to search the forests of the island.  But we
"Yes, if they had any interest in doing so."
idea indeed that I had, and nothing justifies it.  But what can I do?
forests of the island were in full leaf, and the time was approaching

himself behind the trees.  It was not probable that Top scented the
part of the unfortunate Ayrton.  The convicts have dragged him away in
This was a hope, to which Ayrtons companions could still hold.  Indeed,
powerful aid to the settlers!
needed there.  And it was he who was keeping them at the corral!
settlers were talking in Herberts room, when they heard Top utter quick
"Or Ayrton?"
Pencroft rushed up to the orang.  Certainly if Neb had any important
"Neb."
"Let us go, then!" said he.
the trees.
failing strength.
was necessary, therefore, to follow this way, although it was well-known
armed with his club, sometimes in front, sometimes beating the wood at
have taken the precaution to lower it again, so as to keep open a


onto the plateau of Prospect Heights.  The lift was put in motion, and
the edge of the forest, at the approaches to Creek Glycerine.  Neb, who


the removal had so seriously checked.
of being perceived and fired at, tried to extinguish the fire which was
escaped destruction.  But after all, this evil would have been more

store of seed which would enable them to repair these misfortunes.
a more serious malady, the consequence of the profound physiological
intense.  To this soon succeeded a hot fit; his face became flushed; his
"No," said Gideon Spilett, "but there are willows on the border of the
reduced them to a powder, which was administered that same evening to
also affected.

Cyrus Harding, towards Spilett, towards Pencroft.  He was so young to
The next day, the 8th of December, was but a succession of the fainting
violent delirium.  His liver was fearfully congested, his brain
arm, felt his pulse gradually quicken.

there might be discussed later.



"It is enough to make one wish to have a fever oneself!" said Pencroft.

noble and commanding presence.  From this time his recovery, while still
exterminate the convicts, and rescue Ayrton, if he was still living; on
covered the Serpentine Peninsula, all to the right of the Mercy, the
time, and it would be too late to prevent it; or it had been the
the woods, and that in the midst of these thick forests a shot might
the return of the colonists, for the machinery of the lift had been


"Nevertheless," observed Cyrus Harding, "I notice that these creatures,
to leave unguarded.
meal, for their appetites were sharpened, and measures were then taken
The night, however, was but of few hours.  The darkness was due rather
During the day Herbert discovered several new specimens not before met
their speed.
den to which they may be tracked like tigers!"


America or Africa had been transported into this temperate zone.  This
No traces were found on the western coast, although they were carefully
"I do not think so," answered the engineer, "for they would naturally
gratitude to perform."

impatient to regain entire possession of their island.
was occupied.  To go there openly, in broad daylight, when the convicts

Cyrus Harding consented.  Top and Jup were to remain with the engineer,
advanced with great caution.
imprudence on their part, of which they would be the first victims,
it issued from the dense forest, covered the clearing.  Mount Franklin
They reached the gate without the darkness being illuminated by a single
This would have been contrary to Cyrus Hardings instructions.
Pencroft probably agreed with this decision, for he followed the

The clearing soon came in sight.  It was deserted.  Without hesitating,
doubted, as the gate then closed could only have been opened by them.
All five advanced and indeed, through the window fronting them, they saw
then feebly lighted by the inner light.  He gazed into the apartment.
and cruelly suffered.  On his wrists and ankles could be seen great
"Where am I?"
back here."
At that moment the moon appeared in the east, above the black curtain of
"Be ready to fire, my friends!" cried Harding.

The colonists, a prey to a thousand confused thoughts, under the
The day after his arrival at the corral, on the 10th of last November,

Herberts death.  The settlers were now only four, and, as it seemed, at
of the island, or the south coast.
weakness.

"And who has struck the blow?" asked Pencroft.
it proved was of a nature to wound a haughty spirit.  A generosity
superhuman power.  In a few minutes, the settlers re-entered the house,
convicts are no longer to be feared, it is not owing to ourselves that

notice there to point out the position of our island and say that Ayrton


lasted an entire week.  The base of the mountain, with its spurs and
quantity of ammunition and provisions, conveyed thither by the convicts
fertility of its southern part.  As to the Mercy, it was more directly
two valleys, wide, not very deep, without any appearance of vegetation,

"Then the volcano is not totally extinct?" said the reporter.

begin to awake, as they risk meeting with some obstruction, after a long
probable that at the lower part of the chimney, time may have

knew how to escape the colonists most minute researches, for, in spite
vapour, no heating of the rock, indicated an approaching eruption.  But
that the mysterious being did not reside on the surface of the island,
CHAPTER FOURTEEN.
to foresee the day when they would be permitted once more to see their
And, really, had any one told Pencroft and Neb that a ship of 300 tons

"And how many months would be required to build a vessel of from 250 to

somewhat capricious, but that at the same time facilitated the access to
northern zone.  At the same time other work was actively continued, and
Nevertheless he was still sad and reserved, and joined more in the work
taken, excellent salmon which came up the Mercy, vegetables from the
and every day their telescope swept the horizon enclosed by the Union
on the island, and should the colonists be obliged to shut themselves up
wind blew from the east, sometimes with the violence of a tempest.  The
a severe frost succeeded this wet period, the wood, its fibres acquiring
"that in equal latitudes the islands and coast regions are less tried by
"Yes," said Herbert, "and icebergs are met with in lower latitudes in
hemisphere during the summer, it is necessarily more distant during the
apogee, and at another time nearer, that is to say, at its perigee.  Now
with its accustomed intensity, and the settlers were often confined to

chlorine.  The soda, which it was easy to change into carbonate of soda,
destined for the construction of the ship enabled them to economise the
During the seven months which had passed since the last researches made
all that was to be said about this enigma, and that he should never

island had already undergone this trial, as was shown by the streams of
After all they could not prevent it.  It did not appear likely that
joists.  The mechanism of this apparatus was as simple as those used in
carpenters had much to do.
always, in the midst of these plans, prevailed the thought of a
"Thats agreed," replied Herbert, laughing and blushing at the same
After that, who knows if Jup and Top had not themselves their little
Cyrus Harding rose.  His companions stared at each other, scarcely

"At last!" exclaimed Harding.
island itself.  The night was very threatening.  But however deep the

"We shall find one at the corral."

was perfectly dark.  A light was struck by Neb, and in a few moments the

"Forward!" cried Harding, who understood that the despatch had not been



iron.
hundred paces when the ridge by a moderate incline sloped down to the

in a deep hollow.  Rain now began to fall in torrents.  The thunder was
Cyrus Harding returned to his companions, and said simply--
An hour passed.  All climbed down through the rain to the level of the
The elliptical roof, under which the boat at first passed, suddenly
and preserved them for the admiration of man.
half-a-mile must have been cleared from the mouth of the cave, when
sparkles, so that the boat appeared to be floating between two
wall, blocking up any issue on that side.  The cavern widened here

light through a thick glass.
the treasures of the mineral world, works of art, marvels of industry--


atmosphere was saturated with the electric fluid.

"I do."
"He and his two companions did not then perish in the Maelstrom, in the
The engineer was silent.
The engineer and reporter rose.  Their companions had drawn near, and
repose for a while, but he shook his head as a man to whom the morrow
extensive and profound.
cosmopolitans, curious of knowledge, but disdaining action; one of those
unscrupulous than he was, the people of India were persuaded that they

mountain fastnesses of Bundelkund.  There, alone in the world, overcome
electricity, which, extracted from inexhaustible sources, was employed
those nations who fought for the independence of their country.  [See
had brought them in contact with his mysterious existence.  Instead of
navigation of the _Nautilus_ were narrated and exposed to the curiosity

considerable.


by one idea, and without taking the proffered hand of the engineer--
instant into the Prince Dakkar, "an enemys frigate!  It was she who
of history, which does not condemn heroic folly, but its results."
"may God bless you!"
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.
marvels of the _Nautilus_ which millions could not have purchased, and

Without doubt Captain Nemo heard Cyrus Hardings reply, for he raised
bronze on their pedestals; the magnificent organ, leaning against the
After some minutes, during which, doubtless, he passed in review his

The colonists listened reverently to the words of the dying man.
After a few moments repose, necessitated by his extreme weakness,

event of a crisis coming on, but the dying man refused, saying, "I shall
in which was stationed the helmsman, when he navigated the _Nautilus_
"What a man!" said Pencroft.  "Is it possible that he can have lived at

companions again descended to the interior of the _Nautilus_.  There
affectionately.

race, and to all whom I have known I have long been as are the dead.--


Once or twice more he spoke to the colonists who stood around him, and
was on his knees by the reporters side, motionless as a statue.
closed.  The iron door leading on deck was then securely fastened in
The powerful light it gave forth lighted up the translucent water,
At break of day the colonists regained in silence the entrance of the
which rendered it impossible to count upon settled weather.
Spilett, and even Cyrus Harding, could not escape this impression.  Thus
least, sooner or later, proceed to Tabor Island, to leave there the
constructed.
men.
between the commotion of the atmosphere and that of the interior of the

serious.
"Well, captain," said Pencroft, "we shall witness the eruption; and if
Cyrus Harding shook his head with the air of a man who augured no good
"It seems to me," said Ayrton, who had reclined so as to place his ear
Franklin smoke, groan, bellow, or spout forth fire and flame as much as
January, without thinking further of the volcano, which could not,
In the evening, after supper, Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, and
vapour obscured the sky, through which glimmered a few stars.
"Do not you feel a certain vibration of the soil?" asked Cyrus Harding.
the brilliancy of which was visible even through the vapours.  Thousands
"Nevertheless," continued the reporter, "would not the greatest
Gideon Spilett said no more, and soon, in spite of the explosions of the
In fact, the substances thrown up fell back again into the abyss, and it
"As you are going to-morrow to the corral I will accompany you."
Cyrus Harding, but he would not vex Pencroft by his absence.
only with difficulty discernible.

engineers return, busied himself with the musmons and goats, which
time, tremble beneath him, but he could discover no traces of fresh

"Good, Ayrton."
from the cloud.  No quadruped appeared in the woods.  Even the birds had
following almost step for step the difficult path which, during that
"The iron boat should be there," said the engineer.
electric light.  Possibly it might not yet be extinguished, but no ray

great thickness.

corral, where they left all in order, Cyrus Harding and Ayrton arrived
"Explain yourself, Cyrus!" said Gideon Spilett.

fissures and clefts which already allow the sulphureous gases generated
interior of the island to the boiling lava, Lincoln Island will that day
converted into steam with a sudden energy which no enclosure could
Pencroft could not prevent a large tear from rolling down his cheek, nor

thrown down upon the island, making it tremble to its foundation.
instant destruction.
the house like dry grass, and leaving not even a post of the palisade to
"I hope so!" was Cyrus Hardings only reply.
forth ignited rocks, which, hurled to more than a thousand feet, burst
inclination of the soil, the lava gained rapidly in the east, and as its
"Either the lake will arrest the progress of the lava, and a part of the
been greater, might have sufficed to arrest the torrent.
It was not a moment too soon.  The liquefied substances soon after
as if the valves of an immense boiler had been suddenly opened.  But,
stretched the calm waters of the lake now appeared an enormous mass of
refuge on board the vessel, content to rig her after she should be
But if the island was thus partially protected on this side, it was not
koulas, and game of every kind, mad with terror, had fled to the banks
were a few grotesque blackened and branchless stumps.  The site of the
of provisions, they could not even gather the means of subsistence!
later the flames must reach the powder-magazine.  To work, Spilett, to
afterwards, but the essential point was that the colonists should have
concentrated upon his vessel.
"Certainly, Neb," answered Cyrus Harding.
the inner court, the stables, were all destroyed.  The affrighted
her at once.
stood.
It was all that remained of the structure of Granite House!  The wall

means of quitting the reef; no fire, nor any means of obtaining it.  It
"If we had but a walnut-shell to take us to Tabor Island!  But we have
Could they calculate that, by a truly providential coincidence, the



"How could you be aware of the existence of Lincoln Island?" inquired


taken of what remained of this shoal, which must henceforward figure on
the hospitality of Lincoln Island.  There was founded a vast colony to


their counters to become extempore captains, colonels, and generals
in the world, are born engineers, just as Italians are musicians and
Now when an American has an idea he seeks another American to share it.
preferred to them in every circumstance.

killed forty fantassins; and in 1742, Kesseldorfs Austrian cannon, of
be admitted without contestation: by dividing the number of victims
arms, and those who had grown old on their gun-carriage. Many whose
were silent, the howitzers were muzzled for long enough, and the cannon,

morning you leave your tranquil occupations, you are drilled in the use

"Why, there might be something to do over there, and if they accepted
American customs. Those folks seem to think that you cannot be a
steamers, or wont England, in defiance of the rights of nations, hang
that dont know what to do with them. Look here, without looking any
"It would not be a bad reception," murmured Bilsby between the four


at Baltimore had gone on the invitation of their president. The express
news from the interior.
garlands of howitzers--in a word, all the tools of the artilleryman
Spanish piece, and a report-bell, which, when required, went off like a
wildest enterprises; an essential New-Englander, a Northern colonist,
_sang-froid_.
"Brave colleagues,--It is some time since an unfruitful peace plunged
ideas food for the activity by which we are devoured."

or, at least, heard of It. Do not be astonished if I wish to speak to
astronomy, geology, and optics can teach is known about the moon; but
_Plurality of Worlds_, a masterpiece of his time; but science in its
completely taken in by our countryman. To terminate this rapid history,
years ago a German mathematician proposed to send a commission of

myself if, by means of sufficient apparatus, established under
therefore, the honour of proposing to you, my worthy colleagues, the
disorder. Mouths, hands, and feet made as much noise as they could. All
and as to mechanical difficulties, they are dead before they are born.
sweetest names; between eight oclock and midnight an optician in
waters of the Patapsco, the ships, imprisoned in their docks, overflowed
It would be an error to believe that during this memorable evening
newspapers took up the question; they examined it under its different
magazines published by scientific, literary, or religious societies
the New World.

of their great experiment.


moon?
engine employed.
"Regarding question No. 3, What would be the duration of the
"Regarding question No. 4, At what moment would the moon present the

"Regarding question No. 6, What place will the moon occupy In the

40secs. p.m.
"On behalf of the staff,
unknown centre round which gravitates the universe, would have seen

successively taken place under his eyes.
secondary nebulae--that is to say, into planets.
Milky Way. Centre of a world, and small as it appears amidst the
perhaps, and the Earth one; this latter, one of the least important of
days on her revolution.

of her phases. Cleomenus taught that she shone by reflected light.

Halley, Nasmyth, Bianchini, Pastorff, Lohrman, Gruithuysen, and
the inhabitants of the earth.
generally upon the edges of the craters; their length varied from ten to
"ashy light," it is naturally explained by the effect of the suns rays
BELIEVED IN THE UNITED STATES.
The scientific journals treated the question which touched upon the
angle formed by two straight lines drawn from either extremity of the
towards the terrestrial globe, is lighted by it with an intensity equal
round yourselves, since your eye will have successively traversed every
They then learnt that the firmament, with its infinite stars, may be
reason these eclipses do not happen twice in a lunar month is because
enterprise, and public opinion was much exercised thereupon.

the moon would one day end by falling into the earth. However, they were
revolutions, earthquakes, deluges, &c.; they therefore believed in the

sittings to elucidate the three great questions of the cannon, the
"Dear colleagues," said he, "we have to solve one of the more important
the dimensions of the former."
"My dear colleagues," he continued, "I will be brief. I will lay aside

times that speed, we shall hurl it with a rapidity of seven miles a
second. I have every reason to believe that we shall succeed, but at
of 800 yards a second, a result which neither Armstrong nor Palliser has
"We must take the speed of 800 yards for a starting point. We must keep
"What do you mean, Barbicane?" asked the major.
thousand, and bring the moon to within a distance of forty miles. Now at
"I am, though."

know that in the Middle Ages surprising results were obtained, I dare


"Yes, an obus," answered Barbicane; "that is what it must be; a solid
once."

Henry St. Claire Deville, succeeded in 1854 in obtaining aluminium in a
aluminium cost 260 to 280 dollars; then it fell to twenty-seven dollars,
"Perfect!" cried Maston; "that suits our programme capitally."
"As to the form of the projectile," resumed Barbicane, "it is of little
HISTORY OF THE CANNON.
weight. It is probable that we shall have to give it gigantic
happens? It is acted upon by three independent forces, the resistance of
immobility. The question is, therefore, how progressively to overcome
"Until now," said Barbicane, "the longest cannon, our enormous
you tax me with exaggeration."

"I think so too," answered Barbicane; "that is why I propose to

"Because we have not discussed its form. Shall it be a cannon, howitzer,
howitzer, because it will hurl an obus. Lastly, it will be a mortar,


to work. I therefore think we must adopt an excellent material, but
explode, I can answer for that."
"And how much will that cost at two cents a pound?"

discovery with his life. But it is nearly proved now that this story
volume of powder is to the volume of gas produced by its deflagration as
"Absolutely certain," answered the major. "The Armstrong cannon only
reduced to 116 lbs. only.
"Nothing is more exact," said Morgan; "but, before deciding the quantity
"We might make several touchholes," said J.T. Maston, "so as to set fire

a minute.




"Is there not an American name to put at the bottom of this discovery?"
properties which make it so precious to us. It is prepared with the

chamber to traverse under a force of 6,000,000,000 of litres of gas
CHAPTER X.
excite public curiosity. The projectile, once fired, would be out of
thus constituted--Barbicane was more sensitive to this one mans
destined to pierce the latter, the latter determined not to be pierced.


projectile, when the war ended the very day that Nicholl terminated a

To these insinuations Barbicane answered nothing. Perhaps he never knew
war begun, he called reasons of every kind to his aid, reasons it must
fall in red-hot rain on the heads of the imprudent spectators.
government became necessary, and the safety of all must not be

5. That the projectile would not even go six miles, and would fall a few

the immense Columbiad should be cast.
lessen the glory of his country, and if there is one right that the
_casus belli_, and I demand that war should be declared against Mexico!"
and you had glanced at this map, you would know that it is perfectly
off which it cuts an angle, it continues its direction over Mexico,

Floridan deputies. The members of the Gun Club did not know which to
Florida itself had chronic "vomito negro," and Texas was not far wrong.

The war had been thus kept up for some days when Florida tried to draw

the situation became intolerable. An engagement was expected between the




establishments of Great Britain, it made short work of it; it boldly
had great success.
Three days after President Barbicanes manifesto 400,000 dollars were
and the impetus which they have given to astronomical studies, thanks to
Sweden and Norway contributed 52,000 rix-dollars. The figure was small

her childrens pockets, but by turning them well inside out. If she had
communication with the Queen of Night, so Switzerland thought it
England alone remained. The contemptuous antipathy with which she
1,446,675 dollars; total, 5,446,675 dollars.
Manufactory, New York, which during the war had furnished Parrott with

his business to study the geography of Florida. Never before had the

and the town of Tampa appeared, carelessly lying on a little natural
went out to meet him, an honour quite due to the president of the Gun

thermometer indicated 84, but fresh sea breezes moderated this
Bahama Channel double continually. It is the advanced sentinel of the
South grow in perfection, its immense fields, where a tropical sun and

"Still," resumed Barbicane, "if by the elevation of the ground or its

which the crab-eater deserved a jewel casket, worthy of its feathered
pelicans, phaetons, and teals that frequented the banks, while the red
firing their guns with a dull report. However, they confined themselves
began to fix his position with extreme precision. The little troop drawn

Espiritu-Santo Bay with a fleet of steamboats. Murchison had succeeded

It is known how American railways are constructed, with capricious
_Tampico_ kept her steam up awaiting his orders in Hillisboro harbour.
thick, and with a stone revetment nineteen and a half feet thick; we
difficulty, and in which the elements had to be more directly contended
given up. Hence a great economy of time, for they could then employ the
was carefully taken out, as it was to be used for the casting.
they found themselves inclosed in a well twenty-one feet wide.
calcined planes; by night, under the white waves of electric light, the
drain it off, so as to close up the orifice from which it issued, just

Americans pay very little attention to. They are more occupied with


operation the metal was taken to Stony Hill. But there were 136 millions
contained about 1,400,000 lbs. of metal; they had been built on the
a mixture of clay and sand, with the addition of hay and straw. The
Barbicane.
the Gun Club who made the voyage to Tampa Town. Among them was the brisk
metal to be melted. There were, therefore, 68,000 tons of coal throwing

magnificent spectacle. The ground trembled, whilst these waves of iron,

less than a fortnight to cool. How long, therefore, would the monstrous

diminished in intensity and thickness. A few days after the earth only
pickaxes, spades, and boring-tools were set to work without
communication, the enormous weapon, raised by means of delicate
Still there were yet three bets of 3,000, 4,000, and 5,000 dollars, and
Brooke in a network of streets it was now being lengthened out on that
to the port. Soon other vessels of every form and tonnage, freighted
day in the brain of one man, could take as its right the airs of a large
However, though given up to its commercial and industrial fury, the new
eyes, but Barbicane would allow no one to see that operation. Thereupon
interior of this metallic abyss. Baskets hung from steam-cranes allowed
exquisite! A table had been laid for ten on the massive stone which
J.T. Maston could contain himself no longer. Whether he shouted or ate,
yet two months would still elapse before the day the projectile would
He tore open the envelope and read the message, and, notwithstanding his

would have been quite silent about it for prudence sake, and in order
us!"--"Ridiculous!"--"Absurd!" Every sort of expression for doubt,
the folly to believe in his existence. When Barbicane proposed to send a
about it, instead of troubling a whole population with such ridiculous


assemblage, he went towards the telegraph-office.
At this confirmation of the first telegram the eyes of the president
the news, and how they chanted the arrival of this hero from the old
At 9 a.m. on the 20th of October the semaphores of the Bahama Channel

cast," to borrow one of his expressions from metallurgic art.

fellow; he loved arguments _ad hominem_, and defended the weak side
But this enterprising fellow had the defects of his qualities. Who risks
mind. He was known to be so imprudent! When some friend wished to stop
enthusiasm took such a personal form that Michel Ardan, after having
"Then," said Barbicane, without further preliminary, "you have decided

Whereupon the president left the cabin, and told the crowd about Michel

of adepts, to his colleagues for instance. But it was as easy as to dam
and did not hear. As to the remaining third, it neither heard nor saw,
"Gentlemen," said he, "although it is very warm, I intend to keep you a
moon. That journey would be made sooner or later, and as to the mode of

"Dear hearers," he resumed, "according to certain narrow minds--that is
would take an express train to reach the moon? Three hundred days. Not
"Well, my friends, this distance from Neptune to the sun is nothing
his conceptions.
the earth to her satellite is really very unimportant and unworthy to
with unanimous applause.
smiling; "still, if I am not mistaken, men of great intelligence--Plutarch,
"And I--I am certain of it," answered Michel Ardan.
worlds bearable to beings organised like we are. If I were a naturalist
must necessarily have been animalised. Lastly, if I were a theologian
question. I am not here to give you an instructive lecture upon this
a very slight inclination, the inhabitants can enjoy invariable


discuss the practical part of his expedition."
"You are right, sir," answered Michel Ardan, "the discussion has

"There is no question of those two, sir, and I can quote in support of
"So much the better," replied the Frenchman, "if my madness takes me to

argument, and a _savant_, perhaps, would be embarrassed to answer it. I
"We will pass on, then," answered Michel Ardan, "and leave this series

A movement took place amongst the audience, who appeared struck by the
An inverse movement brought back the audience to the side of their
"Any way you will do well to take your precautions, for the air will be

surface of the moon?"
"You wish to add a few words?" he asked, in the most gracious tone.

"But your fall upon the moon, supposing you ever get there?"



The cries of the immense crowds kept at their maximum of intensity




served him for sheets, and he was thinking of installing a more
"Yesterday evening," exclaimed J.T. Maston _ex abrupto_, "our president
Nicholl, how that enmity was of old date, why until then, thanks to
"What demons you are!" exclaimed Michel Ardan, when his companion had
"Have you seen a man enter the wood armed with a rifle? Barbicane, the



their interrupted walk. From time to time they shouted; they called
What can he be doing?"

In fact, Captain Nicholl, with his gun on the ground, forgetting the
"Michel Ardan!" exclaimed the captain, "what have you come here for,

"Sir," said Nicholl, convulsively seizing his rifle, "this joking--"
The three men immediately set out; the captain, having discharged his
Barbicane did not move. Ardan stared at the captain, but he did not
up and looked at him with astonishment.
eye.
thanks to God, who has prevented it, there is nothing more to fear. When
all is ended between you, and as you are men who risk your lives,
say to you is, Come with me, and see if we shall stop on the road."

which solved the difficulty, the simultaneous acceptation of the two
was soon completely worn out, his voice became hoarse in consequence of
"Singular folly!" said he to Barbicane, after having dismissed them;
Physicians have ranked epilepsy amongst the maladies that follow the
In the height of his triumph Michel Ardan could not escape any of the
contrary, he put himself at the disposition of the public, and
"I do not mean," said he, "to play the part of Adam with a daughter of
that destroy, burn, smash, and kill, dont talk to me about them!"

been attended with the best results, and given rise to the most
Into this charming bomb, which was closed by means of a lid, screwed
of the bomb, which was rapidly hoisted on board. Five minutes had not
at an end; besides, Barbicanes plans were destined further to perfect

another thing. Michel Ardan did not want to travel squirrel-fashion; he
metallurgic production that did the greatest honour to the industrial

"Well, my friend, I think we ought always to put a little art in all we
"Well, I should have acquitted him, friend Barbicane. That is why you
effects of the shock were applied with perfect intelligence.
making a spring, and the disc, itself furnished with extremely powerful
marvellously executed; the effect once produced and the water gone, the
thick and the bottom thicker, as it would have to support all the
could, therefore, observe during their journey the earth they were
a tap, and the gas would light and warm this comfortable vehicle for six
contained in 100 litres of air. Barbicane, his two companions, and two
and after a certain time all the oxygen of the air is replaced by
acid and form bicarbonate of potash. So much for the absorption of

What happened during that week? It was impossible to ascertain. The

which it is well to recall here. A field-glass is composed of a tube
Thus in field-glasses refraction plays the principal part, and
optician Lerebours, furnished with an object-glass equally large, and
now that power would only bring the moon within 39 miles, and would only
glasses lose less by absorption than the reflection on the metallic
In telescopes it has been seen that the glass placed at the observers
tube was formed at the other extremity where the eyeglass was placed.
years ago. Nevertheless the setting up of such an apparatus presented
begins at the Straits of Magellan, follows the west coast of South
Neither pen nor language could relate the difficulties of every kind
journey across space.
nebula in Taurus, which Lord Rosses reflector had never been able to
his third bet. It was, in fact, nothing less than the loading of the gun
of Stony Hill. He had it brought little by little carefully packed in
together by a wire destined to communicate the electric spark to them

watched.



Nicholl and a vigorous Newfoundland of prodigious strength. Several
only, for, according to the latest observations of astronomers, no one
there? Well, then, every time that the moon is in favourable conditions
sordid attachment to this earth to hesitate to follow the three
enormous weight the fall of such a mass would inevitably ignite the
"Then," said Michel Ardan, "there is but one thing I wish for you now,

His sleep had been peaceful--it was the sleep of Turenne upon a
Every nation upon earth was represented; every language was spoken at
preceded, and surrounded their husbands, fathers, and masters, who

and at 4 p.m. there were many spectators in the crowd who had not taken
sky, and caressed the enraptured crowd with her most affectionate rays.
observatories. Barbicane was coolly and calmly giving his last orders.
Barbicane had set his chronometer to the tenth of a second by that of
A few moments later the three travelling companions were installed in
wind on the earth! Not a sound of breathing from the crowd! Hearts dared
Murchison immediately pressed his finger upon the electric knob and
CLOUDY WEATHER.


Atlantic, died away on the African coast.


their destination on the 4th at midnight; so that as up to that time it
which the earth is three parts covered.

On the 8th no change. On the 9th the sun appeared for a moment, as if to

experiment made by the Gun Club:--
and has become her satellite.

can penetrate all her mysteries. The names of Nicholl, Barbicane, and
alone had confidence, and it was their friend--devoted, audacious, and
Those three carry with them into space all the resources of art,
       *       *       *       *       *
science. The members of the Gun Club, a circle of artillerymen
initial velocity of 12,000 yards a second. Hurled on the 1st of December
long, and should be cast at once in the ground; 3, that the charge
make a survey of the terrestrial satellite. This intrepid adventurers
ready.
Columbiad had the immediate effect of disturbing the terrestrial
in the following year, for the moon, entering her last quarter on the
gone near enough to be retained by lunar attraction; that its

according to him, contained the last communication about this
reach the surface of the disc.

There an opening made on purpose let them down into the aluminium
Saying which the light-hearted fellow struck a match on the sole of his
Michel Ardan examined everything, and declared himself quite satisfied
regulated to the tenth of a second by that of the engineer, Murchison.
Pascal or a Newton are more precious than the whole existence of a crowd
starting."
acknowledgment! I ask to get out."
rushing too violently to our heads."

the movable flooring. There the three travellers were to lie down a few
"There are some," affirmed Michel Ardan, "the same as there are horses,
will have to make over another nine thousand dollars to the president,
dollars."
ordinary powder! And friend Murchison, with his chronometer in hand and
floor.

them--J.T. Maston, for instance--had been able to get a glimpse of the
partitions and the escape of the water, three bodies lay motionless. Did
"Brrr!" said he. "I feel as though I had been drinking two bottles of
knees, two Americans will have no difficulty in getting upon their feet.
Their bodies were thrown one upon the other, Nicholl on the top,
companions. He was bleeding, but Nicholl was glad to find that the
eyes, sat up, took the hands of his two friends, and his first words
"Impossible!" cried President Barbicane.
silence reigned outside. But the thick padding was sufficient to shut
five minutes to eleven. It is already eight minutes since we started.
bets--four thousand dollars because the Columbiad has not burst, five
worthy of me! It is not serious! Have we not been half stunned by the
"I did not either."
fastened the bolts on the outer plates of the right-hand skylight
"No, my friends, we have not fallen on the earth again! No, we are not
travellers had quitted the earth.
tore out a clear page, wrote a receipt in pencil, dated it, signed it,
"Do not frighten yourself," answered Barbicane, "Our spheroid is at her
"Eh!" cried Michel Ardan. "Whatever is that? Another projectile?"

"Of course! you know everything."
That implies prodigious speed."
"More than 2,000 leagues!" cried Michel Ardan. "That beats the express

sky, thus seen, presented quite a different aspect--one that no human
"Yes!" answered Michel Ardan. "We must not be ungrateful to it. As we

"That the earth!" repeated Michel Ardan, staring at the thin slice of
However, by dint of a natural phenomenon, identical with that produced

affections.
voice cried--
CHAPTER III.
indefinitely prolonged if an unexpected noise had not awakened them
it had recovered its voice along with the feeling of hunger.
come here!"
before discovering him in one of the upper compartments of the
greedily.
aspect--the continents shining under the solar rays, the seas darker,
"Men like us!" cried Michel Ardan. "But now they are not more like us


the terrestrial globe, and the suns rays fell directly upon the lower
and there is an eclipse. If, therefore, we had started during an eclipse
"It is pleasant here now," said Nicholl.
was a danger we did not foresee."
upon it as well as upon a solid floor; but the sun, which struck it

deleterious gas, the product of the combustion of the elements of blood
its padded box and hung upon the wall. Of course it was only acted upon
to take the height of the sun, a theodolite, an instrument for
time in a voice very out of tune some old French song to enliven the
The same spectacle was spread before them. All the extent of the
the recital of his journey under the empire of these impressions, and he
The day, or rather--for the expression is not correct--the lapse of
The night passed without incident. Correctly speaking, the word "night"
than repose. Every object is indifferent to it. When a body is in repose


"About our friends at Cambridge. You have already remarked how

a hammer, or to plough without a ploughshare?"
"And could you show me how they calculated the initial speed of our

"It is the inverse of the differential calculus," answered Barbicane


"That appears a good solution, Barbicane," said Nicholl, who was
who know how to read it."
"No, Michel, all the difficulty consists in what Barbicane has done. It
"Now listen," said Barbicane to his ignorant comrade, "and you will see
"_m_ is the volume of the earth; _m prime_ that of the moon. We are
"Good."
"It means that when our projectile reached the limit of the terrestrial
expressions--that is to say, find out their value."

"What next?" asked Michel Ardan.
Barbicane wrote rapidly on the paper--

his eyes, whilst Michel Ardan compressed a coming headache with his two


CHAPTER V.
folded his arms and examined his calculations. Michel Ardan murmured--
terrestrial globe. Then through the lower port-light he made a very
myself why we met with the second satellite, that gravitates at more
than that indicated by the Cambridge Observatory, but the Cambridge

"Certainly," answered Michel; "not only for our amusement, but also in
"Yes."


when the earths crust was not sufficiently formed."

"But at least," said Michel Ardan, "we might have brought an ass,

upon hinges. They can be let down. We will open one of them, and throw

"The second reason is that we must not allow the exterior cold, which is

would not be so redoubtable as you would suppose."
equal to 28,000 times that of summer. But this heat, capable of

have leisure to make the experiment, for our satellite moves in the
the celestial bodies are in space, so say works on molecular physics. It
much wiser. So I much prefer the old comparisons of the _Double
were carefully unscrewed, and an opening of about half a yard made,

distance they were at their relative size did not seem to alter much.
recorded.
"Admit that it had struck against some body in space."
now known that heat is only a modification of movement when water is
because my movement has been transformed into heat."
"Her temperature would be carried to such a point," answered Barbicane,


but actually prevents us roasting."

"Yes, eclipses of the sun," answered Barbicane, "when the centres of the

ourselves when we get there. Now, Barbicane, do you believe that the
certain _savants_ think the moon was a comet which its orbit one day
"Why?"
companions watched the vault of space through the lower port-light.
attraction, and which will accompany it as far as the moon?"
When you pneumatically create void in a tube, the objects you throw down
the port-light? What delight it would be to be thus suspended in ether,
"And we must remain imprisoned in our vehicle."
In fact, this deformed object, reduced to nothing, and quite
That furnished a text for conversation which the whole evening could not
windows made silvery with her rays, they saluted the Queen of Night with

the importance of this deviation, for there was no datum to go upon. He
brilliancy. Those large spots that give the appearance of a human face
This last day left them the liveliest remembrances. They noted down the
distil the most generous wines--that is, if they existed. Any way, the
the taps, and fixed by the pyrometer the heat of the gas. All had gone
would have followed us in space like remorse!"
in the void you must do without any sentimental promenade out of the
"I say," said he, "it is all very well to go to the moon, but how shall

"That is enough," said Michel, getting animated. "Let us hear no more
think--"
Barbicane. "It is that during the movement of rotation of the globe our

inhabitants of the projectile? Their sobriety could not be questioned.

"I shall speak if it suits me!" cried Michel, violently seizing his

"Stop, unhappy men," said he, putting his two companions back to back,
"No President elected by the nation!" answered Barbicane.
flapping of wings and cock-crows of singular sonority were heard. Five

proceeded to prepare some cups of tea, in order to facilitate the
flood of colourless, savourless, and odourless gas, eminently vital, but
influence, but they had been forgotten as soon as said.

revolt."

attraction, would have given the exact valuation of this diminution.

two heavenly bodies, and nothing drawing it more towards one than the
attraction over lunar attraction.
diminished little by little, had not yet perceived its total absence.
shoulders. Their feet no longer kept at the bottom of the projectile.
"The Assumption cannot last," answered Barbicane. "If the projectile

Barbicane thought he remarked that the conical end of the projectile
consequences which were only pure imagination.
"Yes," cried Michel, full of his subject, "let us destroy weight and


less than that of the earth. But do not venture into the big planets,

would be so great--about 5,000 lbs.--that you could not get up again."

ground; others were to retard the shock, and so make it less violent.

through the lateral openings they could still perceive the vast lunar
"We must act as though we should," answered Barbicane.
outside, might, by producing a recoil action, lessen the speed of the

had foreseen the only three hypotheses that were possible--the return to
precautions that were taken, the Columbiad was not aimed correctly. The
"Yes," resumed Nicholl. "The notice from the Cambridge Observatory said

"I would not give half a dollar to know! We have deviated, that is a
them nearer the lunar disc, and it might be hoped that at a nearer point
projectile appeared to him to be 200 yards a second, or about 170

"What does that matter? Its bulk, compared with that of our projectile,

reach.
Thus, then, at that distance the topographical details of the moon, seen
gravity was in advance of the centre of her figure, and from this fact
"No, Michel, no. We can only reach the moon by a fall, and we are not
ought to have set foot upon her if the unlucky asteroid had not made
penetrated the secrets of its satellite! A strange emotion filled their
which were only exact twice a month, at the first and second
nomenclature, which human vanity made haste to adopt.
After him, a German astronomer, Tobie Marger, about the middle of the
After these _savants_ may be cited the selenographic reliefs of the
1,000 leagues. But then at a distance which towards 3 a.m. did not

peninsulas. They recall the confusion in the islands of the Sound, where
reach this unknown point on the terrestrial globe.


to the men, the left!"
man contain aught but these? and is it not summed up in these four
two hemispheres of the moon, united to one another like man and woman,
largest plain on the lunar disc, covered a surface of 328,300 square
The "Feminine" hemisphere, naturally more capricious, was distinguished
occupying 219,300 square leagues, in south latitude 3 and west
solid portion of the globe--and 1,410,400 leagues for the seas, lake,
Queen of Night, the daughter of Latona and Jupiter, the younger sister


Here may be placed an important remark on the subject of the map which
them.
forests, according to the opinion of Mr. Waren de la Rue, who grants a

an equal; they pass the boundary chains on the north, and stretch as far


cones like enormous dazzling gems. Towards the north the sides of the

for want of explanation."
asked Michel.
"One is as good as the other," answered Barbicane.
Eratosthenes.
"It was a singular idea!" answered Nicholl. "But it is probable that

      "    Oural          5 "  13   "        838
north by the Carpathians, the profile of which measures about 100
continuous chains. They present an average height of 3,200 metres, a
This mountain, which rises only 1,815 metres above the lunar surface,
lunar disc he did not despair of ultimately reaching it, or at least of
slow, was inexplicable to President Barbicane. At that distance from the
Large patches of different colours appeared on the disc. Selenographers
Humours. Barbicane likewise remarked the wide craters with no interior
is situated near the Hercynian Mountains, on the border of the moon. But
"Cultivated fields!" repeated Nicholl, shrugging his shoulders.
formation or their nature.
these furrows. Neither Hevelius, Cassini, La Hire, nor Herschel seems to

visible when they grow again."
in each region, according to its position, there reigns perpetual
of the Sea of Rains under the name of the Gulf of Iris.
appearance of vegetation anywhere. Of the three kingdoms represented on

the orb.
Mont Blanc and the sea level. All this region was bristling with peaks

the chiaro-oscuro, could not be painted by a landscape-painter of the
would have been hurled along by its movement, and not have reached it

of the equality of the movements of translation and rotation of the
"We must not accuse the sun," said Nicholl. "It is not his fault, it is
"Good!" answered Michel Ardan; "as that business is settled let us have

for ever invisible to our fellow-beings of the terrestrial globe."

"Thank you," said Michel.

moon is full--that is to say, situated with regard to the earth the
Amongst others he quoted the observations of the suns eclipses, which
globe, and which oscillates regularly. Whence comes that oscillation?
other side, as certain astronomers pretend."
body maintain it in the ether? It was henceforth evident that it would
observers. It was precisely the unknown hemisphere that was hidden from
vegetation still persists there? Suppose that animals people these
flames. One look could take in the firmament from the Southern Cross to
thick coating of ice. The sun no longer warmed the projectile with his
we have been blinded with light, and saturated with heat like the
calculations of Fourier or Pouillet are correct."
Before beginning the experiment this instrument was compared with an
you draw back will be only a stump, frozen and deformed by the frightful
risk our thermometer, we will tie something to it, and so easily pull it


The truth is that they were not masters of their projectile--that they
either the direction or the velocity of the projectile. Perhaps it was
upon the moon."
"But then," asked Michel, "I am curious to know how our vehicle would
and with greater speed an hyperbola."
makes a greater angle with the base than the side of the cone makes."

"Ah, _savants_! What does it matter about hyperbola or parabola if they
lowness of the surrounding temperature forced them to consume a certain
for instance, an avalanche, or a volcano in activity? Should they not
favourable. I agree that the moon, bathed in sunlight, would not be
visited that in our exploring expeditions on the lunar globe. So,
gravitate at a distance of 108,260 leagues, 172,200 leagues, 274,700
constitution of the half of the disc which their satellite hides
invisible disc exactly as if it had fallen towards it.
quite extinguished."

Barbicane became absorbed in reflection. He forgot himself in a mute
salt.
incandescence. The surrounding air is not necessary to the deflagration.
impossible to describe it. In spite of their courage, their
be made.
These incandescent blocks crossed each other, knocked against each

after so slight a glimpse of the invisible disc?

It was then 3.30 p.m. The bullet was still describing its curve round

They could not be mistaken. There was no longer any question of a simple


Barbicane, therefore, could not rejoice at the position imposed on the

luminous points on the line of separation between light and darkness
moon obliquely in relation to the observer. When they strike her
calculations that 6 of these mountains rise above 5,800 metres, and 22
Clavius, Blancanus, Endymion, the principal summits of Caucasus and the

enchantment. The gas was immediately extinguished by way of economy. The
half-a-mile. They left the port-lights no more, and noted all the
"Snow?" echoed Nicholl.
of which measures 7,603 metres.
appearance of a living world, everything of a dead one, where the
conditions ought to have taken a different form. Yet they had not,
equal to the Asiatic Caucasus. Michel Ardan, with his habitual ardour,
and the details of the ground began to be lost in a confused jumble. The
abyss, the bottom of which the suns rays could never reach. There,
over the circular mountain of Moret. It also passed rather high above
to that of Clavius, which we are over in this moment?"

the creviced region at its culminating point, the most splendid mountain
100,000 leagues. It will, therefore, be readily imagined what its
Tycho is situated in south lat. 43 and east long. 12. Its centre is
crests. It will be understood, therefore, that the bubblings of this
relief! Nature had not left the bottom of this crater flat and empty. It


and reliefs, however high? They all started from a common centre, the
"_Par bleu_!" replied Michel Ardan. "I can easily explain to myself the
Michel, your explanation is not bad, but your comet is not wanted. The
the splendours of Tycho. Their projectile, bathed in that double

kingdom, nor sufficient for the needs of existence such as we understand
matter what form of humanity would be betrayed by appropriations,

"Answer, Citizen Barbicane," said Michel Ardan.
in the interior of the moon than in the interior of the celestial globe.
itself in inutilities, and a world so marvellously habitable must have
itself in the form of clouds. This natural screen tempered the ardour of
which puts every point of the lunar disc under the action of the solar
before the earth?"
"Yes," answered Barbicane, "after having, doubtless, existed for


Barbicane and Nicholl could not help laughing at their companions
north. Different amphitheatres appeared confusedly under the white light
A STRUGGLE WITH THE IMPOSSIBLE.
following away from the moon an analogous curve to that by which it
"But we can make suppositions, I suppose?"
And is that the future that awaits us?"
"But what do you want to do?"

"Nor diminish its speed?"
two friends agree, "for we are moving in the void where we cannot take

was only a day old, having been new at midnight the day before, and two
diminishing in conformity with the laws of rational mechanics.
distant at her apogee. To employ analogous expressions which enrich the

we shall do so."
rigorously directed towards the moon. At that moment it may be hoped
shall reach our goal."
the distance which separates the South Pole from the neutral point. The
"As there is nothing to do," said Nicholl, "I have a proposition to

preoccupations filled the minds of these three men, and a few hours
Michel walking up and down the narrow space between the walls
equal attraction would be reached. What velocity then animated the
travellers favour. If the velocity of the projectile were to be
"One oclock!" said Barbicane.

entered the bullet we did not think it would be so difficult to get out

"True," replied Michel Ardan: "the other world may well console us for



very humble servant of his officers, went to his cabin, took his
inert.

officers were together on the poop. As the moon appeared their thoughts
Bronsfield, smiling.


could have been carried out. He added that by sending luminous rays,
soil of Florida. It is, therefore, now only a question of powder and
systems and theories which were emitted by these audacious minds. Since
His comrades and he at first thought that the hissing came from an



but not an impossible one. But the corvette wanted the necessary
could reach the port of San Francisco. She must, therefore, start at
permission, have the line cut."
14th of December, at 1.27 p.m., she would enter the bay of San

"In north lat. 20 7, and west long. 41 37, the projectile of the
She was to be ready to set sail day or night.

into account the time that had elapsed, and the earths movement of
felt the most violent emotion of his whole existence--an emotion not
stationed in the upper part of the instrument instead of in the lower.
the projectile had become a satellite of the moon gravitating in an
mountain!"
unexpected event cut short these eternal discussions.
Belfast tore the envelope, read the inclosure, and uttered a cry.
orifice of the reflector.
"And where has the infernal bullet fallen?" asked J.T. Maston.

then manufactured. American engineers could not be embarrassed by such a

the Susquehanna apparatuses for compressed air, very ingeniously
In short, everything must be done quickly. J.T. Maston hurried on his

officers, sailors, and passengers. All these men had but one thought.
Club. That was an anxious moment. The Susquehanna was found to be at

windlass would soon have brought up the apparatus on board.
light of their lamps, furnished with powerful reflectors, they could


farther west, and the apparatus, provisioned with air again, took the
On the 28th, after two days search, all hope was lost. This bullet was
the look-out, called out all at once--
utter the thought that came into all their minds.
And what were his first words?
"And it displaces 28 tons, or 56,000 lbs., consequently _it floats_!"
Profound silence reigned in the boats. All hearts stopped beating. Eyes

Nicholl, and Michel Ardan once more? No, and the ardent passion of the
fact, during the publication of the _Journey to the Moon_ they printed
_savants_ who had looked into the dark depths of the amphitheatre of
All the termini of the railroads in the State were joined together by
This locomotive, conducted by a stoker and a mechanic, carried, by a
east of the Union through Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Massachusetts,
established with the moon? Would a service of navigation ever be founded
Vice-President, Captain Nicholl; Secretary, J.T. Maston; Director,

But as yet we have not reached the open sea we have still to thread our
all, no sailor could have hesitated for a moment in telling her
Navigation Company, which join the French transatlantic line of Colon
determination is a problem to be solved in the future. However, I will
years of age. He is of the middle height and slight build, and has a
him closely, and do what I can to understand the man who, as commander
narrow channels of Charleston; and I have no reason to doubt that they
sea-sickness has prevented some of them from making an appearance at

purpose, by the blessing of God, at the earliest convenient season, and
And for the fulfillment of the above covenant, I have pledged and do
carrying cotton, and the entire hold, with the exception of a very

He is a fine tall man, about fifty years of age, with white hair and a
that the fathers life is bound up with that of his son; his devotion
mother, who died at his birth."

may forget, I can never forget. Ah, sir, do you suppose that Andre can
appearance. Like me, too, he has formed a very favorable opinion of

age. She never reads, never talks, and I believe I am not wrong in

as he has generally contrived to do business at a profit, he has

see that this time the captain hasnt chosen to take it."
"All very well, Curtis," I said, "but I dont know what to think about

"Yes," I replied, "the Bermudas were all the rage in the seventeenth
"No doubt you are right, Mr. Curtis," said Andre, smiling, "but poets
CHAPTER VI
Chancellor has many good points, her drift is considerable, and we have

"Think; why, they think just the same as I do," replied the mate; "but
directly with the wind, by presenting her broad bows to the sea; and so
our guard to keep our clothes wrapped tightly to us, they would have

bearings: our latitude, we find, is 21 deg. 33 N., our longitude, 50
short of an overt act of madness on the part of the captain could
ceased. I heard Captain Huntly return to his cabin, and accordingly I
assisted him to mount the poop. In answer to my inquiry as to whether
extra precautions I did not say anything to M. Letourneur, but
meet him, but before he even wished me good morning, I saw him cast a
Curtis aloud as the lieutenant moved away.
He looked at me steadily, but made no reply.
CHAPTER VIII

symptoms. I am quite aware that some sailors are most rebelliously
cause, beginning to murmur at the length of the voyage, and Mr. Kear,
to the belief that it was the high temperature of the tropical regions
in the flowing water.


know it." I listened in silence. I was now fully aroused to the gravity
"Nothing, Mr. Kazallon," he said. "As I told you before, we have

an aperture somewhere which has escaped our notice."
enlighten them.  We dont want terrified women and cowardly men to add
OCTOBER 20 and 21.--The Chancellor is now crowded with all the canvas
as I replied to him in a very casual tone, he passed no further remark.
occurs. The Lesser Antilles are the nearest land; and although they are
has hermetically closed every accessible aperture, and has even taken
said was evidently not intended for my hearing, but my attention was
fears on that score, Mr. Falsten."
I started. To what could the engineer be alluding? Evidently he had not

"On the poop," I said.
indignation, he proceeded quietly, though sternly, to interrogate him
I was beside myself with fury; and not being endowed with Curtiss

said; and he pledged his word that when the right moment should arrive
As soon as order was restored, the mate and I joined Falsten on the

Curtis, Lieutenant Walter, Falsten, and myself have been discussing the
he had quite overlooked the fact of there being thirty pounds of

the agony I feel at seeing this fine vessel doomed to be devoured by
ignorance of the extremity of peril to which we are exposed, although
between them.
"And what is the name of the ship?"
present circumstances, I can do nothing. My brain is all in a whirl,
"but I shall endeavor to do my duty."
myself immediately offered him our best wishes, in which Lieutenant
OCTOBER 24 to 29.--For the last five days the sea has been very heavy,
The fire continued to progress even more rapidly than we had hitherto

full northeast wind continued to make her way with undiminished speed.
do everything in his power to bring the ship ahull; every effort was in

looks then at the boats. The long-boat is there, suspended right along
Awed by his determined manner, the men retire, some clambering into the
can to set him free. But the maniac has already eluded his confinement,
through the open hatchway, down into the fiery furnace below.
Poor Ruby, indeed, is lost and gone, but his last words were productive

As far as we knew, Lieutenant Walter, the boatswain, and such of the
more to say, I repeated that it was all over now.
making common cause with the hurricane to fan the fire that was
billows, and turning to the helmsman shouts with all his might,

considerable time, evidently listening to some sound that had caught
for the waves. But how, when the water had mastered the fire, should we
although it was impracticable to step upon the deck, the lieutenant and
in this part of the Atlantic, that it was just possible that we had
and the explosion averted.

bows, a position which renders walking upon the deck anything but an
ex-captain, passive, like an automaton, passed on and took his seat in
shoal, unattached to a shore, and the gloom of a bitter disappointment
"No land in sight," he said, in answer to our eager looks.
Curtis condescended to make no other reply than a shrug of the
shortly afterward announced that there were five feet of water below.
the poop, and a few mattresses that were rescued uninjured have been
M. Letourneur, his son, and I, have just had a long conversation about
tide rose the white breakers disappeared, and the sea, fortunately for
calculate the result, he returned to the poop and announced that we are
that the ship with a hold full of water is only too likely to founder

smoldering, and that it will still be several days before anyone will
however, to this view of our case, but merely asked M. Letourneur if he
Meantime Curtis is taking active measures for totally extinguishing the
in his calculations, and amuses himself by tracing mechanical diagrams
with the other sailors in a manner which, I think, ought not to be
M. Letourneur agrees to my proposal, Curtis has promised to let us have
quarter of a mile long. With the aid of our sounding-lines we found
phenomenon similar to those which produced the Julia Island, off the
upon the maps it may no longer be here."
call up a reef from the depth of the ocean to give the Chancellor time
When we reached the southern point of the island I proposed that we
drawing of the reef. Scarcely had he completed the outline when his
been stranded, corresponded to the hollow place above the knuckle. The
precision of outline in the prismatic angles, sharp as though chiseled
opportunity of visiting it, but he is too preoccupied with other
though she might probably be glad again to accept, I gained my point,
who let it for the small sum of L.12 a year.
Atlantic.
pumps, which he did until the entire hull of the ship, right up to the
condition for the bales of cotton to be removed for the carpenter to
to haul up the heavy bales which had been deluged so frequently by
Curtis thinks it quite probable that the leaks may be mended from the
which sailors always express to the labor.

burned away, and the very ribs of the vessel were considerably damaged;
not run the risk of remaining here. We are now 800 miles from the coast

would be hoisted; if otherwise, she would have to be towed through the
the ship, lightened as she was, over the bar; after which, he might

"Now, my boys," said Curtis, in his calm clear voice, "all together!
back? She would inevitably go to pieces if left balanced upon the

proved so serious an obstruction. Falsten and I accompanied them. We
"But if it is to take us a month, captain, perhaps by that time the
the reef, instead of being thrown into the sea.

that insured her from any danger of being injured by the explosion, it
At high tide the Chancellor weighed anchor and floated out into the
all set, the Chancellor started on her onward way, and two hours later

reckoning that, under the circumstances, caution was far more important

Falsten was about to give vent to an expression of despair, but he was
brought him their report. There was no doubt it was only a question of

personal inspection of the hold. I, with the boatswain and carpenter,
through the scupper-holes than was finding its way into the hold gave
not suppress an oath when he announced, "Six feet of water in the hold!"
bare, with the exception of a reddish beard, which terminates in a
loaded revolver in his hand.
it is to be hoped that Curtis will succeed as well in future. An
the hold who were passing the buckets found themselves immersed up to
sea--which was propitiously calm--so as to favor the operation (which
visits to the deck, I warned her to take every precaution for herself,
Up to the poop rushed Mr. Kear, followed immediately by Falsten and
toward his son. "Yes, my friend," I said, pressing his hand, "we will

By the assistance of his father, who carefully guided his feet up the
joined him for a while upon the poop.
"You have not, then," I added, "abandoned all hope even yet?" I
of Curtiss sanguine view of things, and that the force of reason
with the masts!" they began to cut down the rigging preparatory to
in search of it, and there was no choice but to set to work and to
that floated between the masts after the submersion of the deck, have

truly terrific; every wave that dashed over the ship shook the masts
they spared no pains to accomplish their work effectually.
boats; sure and they found a wathery grave. Nay, nay; while the ould
I attached little importance to the incident, and shortly afterward
At first the sailors took no notice of his request, but on his
and Sandon proceeded to tie a rope round his waist, which they
quarter the breeze would come, for any but a northeaster would bear the
All at once, at about eleven oclock, the moon burst brightly forth


carrying us away from land. Moreover, the ship had sunk considerably
of the masts.
"Ay, ay, sir," said one of the men--OReady, I think.
This, then, was the black speck that I had seen during the night. The
In accordance with my advice, Mrs. Kear has not been informed of her
DECEMBER 6 continued.--The Chancellor no longer maintained her
ships sides by the violence of the waves, and which had not drifted

breathed her last. A few deep sighs and all was over, and I doubt
were his words, the conviction was forced upon my mind that the day

Anxiety, the most intense, took possession of us all. At the very
drifted about two cables-lengths away; but, in spite of all their

Having cast one last, lingering look around him, Curtis then left the

Of the twenty-eight persons who left Charleston in the Chancellor, only
they sight either land or a passing vessel. One cask of biscuit,
courage, moral as well as physical, may give way, and over failing
"My friends," he said, "listen to me. Here on this raft, just as when
and the other seamen were stretching the large royal sail on the yard
At noon, after the necessary preliminary observations, Curtis took the
nay, three times that length of time will be required to accomplish the
certainly not more than 200 gallons, but by reducing each persons
I should not forget that there are two sources from which we may hope

the swell of the waves would indicate that the wind had dropped, and it
makes our scanty allowance of water quite inadequate to allay our
over the reef, for it is capable of motion."
great responsibility of saving other lives than his own, we are
father seems to become more devoted to him than ever, and I have seen
either by word or gesture acted toward her in a way that she could deem

took their place. These horrible creatures have black backs and fins,

ropes, for we dared not run the risk of their being carried overboard,
approached them. When I mentioned the matter to Curtis I found he had
The health of Lieutenant Walter continues to cause us grave anxiety,
impatience with which we awaited the moment when the boatswain should

"Where are you off to now, Owen?" said the boatswain.
Finding that he obtained no reply, he went on:

DECEMBER 21.--No further disturbance has taken place among the men. For

that we can behold--dont you think so too?"

sheets of electricity that formed a vivid background to the dark gray
however, long undulations took place, which the sailors recognized, all

little peril to encounter from the actual wind; but from the mighty

in front of Andre, to shelter him from the waves. Miss Herbey stood
almost double, was removed by the men from its socket before it should

but one of them caught his foot between the planks of the platform,

the effect of calming the severity of the hurricane, and tended to
the survivor of so many shipwrecks. Our party is thus reduced to
The day has passed away in silence. A general depression has fallen
corresponding, I believe, to the number of meals to which he was
Dowlas had carefully readjusted the mast, the sail was once more
inconvenience; fortunately on the 23d the excessive warmth was somewhat
Miss Herbey, besides reserving for him a portion of her own


a time. To our daily half-pound of biscuit the captain has thought to
fish-hooks; but, one thing I do know, and that is, with proper bait
wears, he fastened it to his hook. But still no success; for when,

Curtis had no longer any compass by which to direct his course, nor a
opening of another year with new hopes, new plans, and coming joys? And
forced upon us in a new and startling light. Toward evening I was
And this was only the second day of our misery! What would we not have
managed to rest for several hours.
wanted they scarcely seemed to know, but Owen and Jynxstrop, not quite
Owen, asked him what he wanted.
Jynxstrop, who attempted to strike me with the hammer which he
rolled over the side of the raft and instantly disappeared.
your peace with God, for you have not a moment to live."

deserts her; and although her torn and bedraggled garments float
"Yes; but they have one consolation--they die the soonest," I replied,
"Mr. Kazallon," she said, "I am weaker than you, and shall probably die
cries of agony involuntarily escaped my lips; then I became calmer, and
intend to watch him carefully.
"We will not despair yet," I said; "perhaps some passing ship--"

but do not let anyone see you; the monsters would murder you if they


circulation. At length, by dint of an eager search, he came upon a
moral and physical, which we are enduring? And with it all, I dare not
thirst is far less endurable than extreme hunger. Is it possible that
Before he died, in a few broken words, he thanked Miss Herbey and

should see what we were about, Curtis and I proceeded to our melancholy
more horrible scenes might be likely to occur. Curtis said a few short
"Right! what do you mean?" I exclaimed.
not much among fourteen starving persons, but, small as the quantity

"Have you none left?" at last I asked.
voyage in the top-masts, of the construction of the raft, and of the
"Well, boatswain!" I said, touching him on the shoulder.

was that for the first time I fully realized how the insufficiency of
this illimitable ocean, we have long ceased even to look for land; it
me to see whether I could afford him any relief. But before I reached

poor wretchs symptoms were precisely such as to lead us to suspect
his stomach, the character of which confirmed our previous

at some time or other contained copperas; but what strange fatality had
registered at least 100 deg., and perhaps considerably more.
bath, kept a sharp lookout to give warning of any danger from
"Look behind to larboard," he continued in an undertone.
undeniably, was the ship, but the question rose at once to the minds of
hand, if she was really sailing with the wind, she would come nearer to
For an hour our feelings alternated between hope and despair. The ship
fancied, too, that her sails were no longer filled, but were hanging

dampness made the smoke more dense, and ere long a tall column of dusky
her top-sails above the horizon.
wind; and in spite of our prostration, we appreciate the moderation,
rapidly with their great black fins. The monsters came up close to the
throwing bits of rope and spars into the water in order to entice the
and the only plan that suggested itself was again to have recourse to
to a dark mass skimming along the surface of the water, and making


The shark had closed its jaws, and bitten through the wooden handle of
to await the end that can not now be long deferred.

raising his hands, as it might be in supplication to the relentless
coming; and sure enough, not half a mile from the raft, the dark

expectation that, ere long, other and more abundant clouds might come
into a tin pot, and put it to his lips. To my surprise, he rejected it

always, or at least often, do something that cheated us into believing
as to what quarter of the Atlantic we have been carried by the
down again with the puzzled sensation sometimes experienced when we
length I got the true scent, once for all, so that I could go straight
alleviate the pangs of hunger for one day at least. I was just on the
But Hobart had no idea of allowing me the peaceable possession of what
the food for which we had fought so hard.
strange anxiety. My conscience told me that Hobart had the right to
dawn appeared. There is no twilight in these low latitudes, and the
at my side, and the rope was cut. Then came the sailors. And what was


The boatswain assented to what the carpenter had said, and probably the
JANUARY 19.--All through the day the sky remained unclouded and the
"Theres a thief," howled out the boatswain, "and he shall be found!

"Yes," said Sandon gruffly; "its all gone somewheres, and we are going
To my great relief the search was ineffectual. There was no doubt that
THE NEGRO BECOMES INSANE
were preparing to consume us as their prey.
Forty-two days had passed since we quitted the sinking Chancellor.
possession of a handspike, and rushed upon us all with the ferocity of


man. He keeps perpetually to one corner of the raft, his head dropped
CHAPTER LI
and Curtis, Falsten, and the boatswain, employ the little energy that
To-day I tried to gain a few drops of fresh water by evaporation, but
for death.

leaping into the sea; but, determined this time to preserve the body,
I DECIDE TO COMMIT SUICIDE
that I could myself last but very little longer. All the events and

shake off the phantom fallacies that Curtiss words had suggested to my
that bounded sea and sky--unbroken, definite, distinct as ever! Curtis
stripping my arm, with a steady thrust I opened a small vein. The blood
I should have liked to speak once again to M. Letourneur, Andre, and
must cease to suffer. Just as I was on the point of casting myself

his lethargy by what the carpenter had said, insisted that the drawing
"I will," said a voice behind me. Turning round, I beheld M. Letourneur
never could exactly learn. Then came Falsten, Curtis, Sandon. More than
the hat--those of Dowlas and M. Letourneur himself.

tortures of hunger returned with redoubled violence. With lips
mercy I entreat, I implore you."
To-morrow, then, unless land or a sail appear, the horrible sacrifice
the two sat conversing in an undertone at the back of the raft, their
discouragement; Heaven, he said, he was sure would still spare the
sea.
the faintest sounds, and every ripple of the water, and every murmur of
intoxicated.
raft. The boatswain was still standing intent on his watch, but all of
shall kill me first. It was I who threw Hobarts body into the sea, and
rooted to the spot where I was standing.
"Agreed!" cried Dowlas; and as M. Letourneur held out his bare arms,

"Fresh water?" cried Curtis; "why then, my friends, we are not far from
Andre and his father were the last to drink.

drifted into the only spot in the Atlantic where we could find fresh
My journal has come to a close.
have been lost.
St. Nazaire, which conveyed us to Europe.
"he is an invalid, and he requires, as he deserves, the best of
CHAPTER I.
worn-out crew, and the criminal folly of one or two leading spirits
best thing to be done was to look their prospects fairly in the
hand in speechless sorrow.
a life-time."

what had become of the sledge.
"But, for the dead man we have left behind, we have brought back a
but, tell me, did you find the coal?"
"And no ship to make our way back to England?"

iceberg all ready to hand; weve only got to hollow it out.
Johnson went back to the Doctor, and said--
this very hardness guaranteed the solidity of the dwelling, and the
trim, and, by the time the hut was completed, had filled it with
and then it would be quite useless to look for anything."


In half an hour he returned and sat down in a corner of the hut,
lips were so affected by the scurvy that articulation was
certain, and it is no use thinking over it."

"And this was Shandons doing?" asked Hatteras.
though I half dreaded it too, for you could have done nothing with
and what could I do? The fire-hole was completely blocked up with
devoted to you, and our words come from our hearts. But will you not
was made. I find we are just where we were before we left, in 80
"Well, captain, now we know our actual situation, we are in a

"There is only about half a pound of powder left," said Hatteras.
obliged to relinquish your projects for the present, and is not a
some Esquimaux tribes further south."

The sledge must be loaded with the provisions at once, and as much
the carpenter.
head and calmer temperament, recalled him to reason and duty by
The faithful dog barked as if he understood, and settled himself
Altamont made a sign in the affirmative, and Hatteras went on with
"Exactly?"
"Well take the longitude first. 105, No? 106, 107? It is
made a sign to stop.
"Yes," sighed the American, and fell back motionless in the

been thrown on her side, she had not gone to pieces, and there was
said he wanted to make the north-west passage, and this appeared to
we mean to die of starvation. What do you say, Hatteras?"
This was re-assuring information, though it cut off all hope of

the afternoon everything was ready.
set out for the Porpoise. Bell was scout, as before; the Doctor and
As the Doctor remarked to his companion, it looked like some vast,

danger of falling through. This ice is strong enough to bear the
and what makes the clouds?"
and after their usual supper they lay down and slept comfortably
and through the white flakes the constellations could be seen
had any actual existence except in Altamonts fevered brain, and
must be content with a fourth part to allow the dogs their full
The Doctor was bold enough to make the attempt, but failed in spite

he thought that what would satisfy an herbivorous horse might surely

Next day the route appeared more difficult, and the weary men could
baits to put inside them. He was very disappointed to find them all
The Doctor ran out at the noise of the report, and understood all at
"But you must come in, you obstinate fellow. Come, now, I tell
for some time still.
tasted a morsel of food. Yet these brave, stout-hearted men
men digging their own tomb.


"Ill make one."


the others, speedily discovered the bear about three hundred yards
"Yes," replied the Doctor, "for we have but the one shot to
"the polar bears subsist almost entirely on seals. Theyll lie

moving restlessly about, as if he felt the approach of danger.
allowed his victim to get within ten paces of him, and then sprang
and fired with a sure and steady aim. Before either of his
was, for the enormous quadruped was almost as large as an ox. It
replenishing the stove.
"Quite, Johnson."




"I fancy that is fresh water, from the dark look of it, and the
to catch the rays in full power. In a few seconds it took fire, to
we have further to go yet, and I think the sooner we start the
"It is time we started," said Hatteras, abruptly.
"Hatteras never says a word to this American, and I must say the

"Heaven forfend! for it might involve the most serious
Saturday morning the travellers found themselves in a region of
with a shout that arrested the whole party, and pointing to a white
region what mournful silence prevailed! No willow branches here with
they managed to get on board, and made the welcome discovery that
"I dont doubt your talents, Mr. Clawbonny," replied Johnson;
the five men installed themselves as well as they could on the
It was late next morning before Hatteras and his companions woke,
voyage, and, on making an inventory of what stores remained, they
Pole."
the conversation by saying--
"Ah! Doctor, if you undertake it," said Johnson, "I am sure
the eye could reach, the sea extended, entirely frozen now, though

The dimensions and plan of the snow-house were then settled by the
a strong door taken from the cabin of the Porpoise. The Doctor was
The walls of the house were over five feet thick, and the windows

quarters.
this lone region.
He was a native of New York, he informed his companions, and had
[Illustration: ]
distinguished himself by the concoction of a wonderful pudding,
once, that the festive occasion might be duly honoured. When the
takes away the feeling of being castaways on an unknown shore."
"If no one objects, I think the most suitable name we can give our
called Doctors House."
overland,"
"It is no new sea," returned Altamont; "it is in every Polar

"My dear Clawbonny," replied the American, "it is the custom,
restraining himself by a powerful effort.--P.72]
"Mr. Hatteras," said Altamont, "is welcome to name whatever
restrained himself.
take our revenge by and by, and England will get her full share in



Bay, and from thence to Fort Providence, where we shall find food
their silence, and went on to speak of other things. Sundry
AN EXCURSION TO THE NORTH OF VICTORIA BAY
and consulting over it with his companions.

anything," exclaimed Johnson.
"Well, there will be no difficulty then in producing an electric
complete success. An intense brilliant light streamed from the

The weather was cloudy, but Clawbonny put the galvanic battery in
ice, that the seals had been quite recently on the surface. In one
good deal to do with it, and Ill bet you something I could dress
can endure starvation quite as well as abundance. When an Esquimaux
"Invigorating regimen, certainly!" said Bell.
from the mouth and devour them gradually like boa-constrictors,

replied Clawbonny; "but I have no doubt that if these same
"It is a walrus!" exclaimed the Doctor. "Be quiet, and let us
by his enemies, and soon lay dead, reddening the ice-field with his
has found something for his supper, he need not grumble. Let us go

spotless snow.
them back safe and sound. The hunters were no less glad to find
in these regions. A good meal isnt to be sneezed at."
[Illustration: ]
122, but the palate and tongue are less sensitive."

pride.

next, and human beings. The temperature of Englishmen averages
"Then the heat of our bodies is the same here as in England,"

in 1509, the Adriatic and the Mediterranean were frozen at Venice

"would not the earths temperature be far lower?"
"It is my turn to-night," said Bell.

inner door. The "Snow-House" stood out well, defying storm and

meteorology, handling his subject in an easy, though philosophical
task. He and Johnson had many a talk on the subject, for the old


Georgia."
articles."
us with the greatest satisfaction. I am convinced that, under your

breakfast-tables a century ago."

enumerating troubles when one has got the better of them."

trouble about the last act, while the first ones are going on well.
the tropics, and half at the North Pole."

The wind had shifted north, the air was clear, and the snow firm and
emergency by carrying over a good stock of provisions to the
"Well, these are plain enough, I think!"

"And of their intentions, too," put in Altamont.

[Illustration: ]
other animal. They have smelt something unusual; and, besides, who
But not a sign of anything living was visible, and after a time they
"Behind the icebergs watching us," replied the Doctor.
their astonishment to find it wholly untouched!
"All right," said Clawbonny. "Come along."
upper plateau. When it came to Altamonts turn, and he had gone

"For my own part, even if I must go alone, I will push on to the
wives nor children waiting us in England, but, after all, it is

"You, captain."



themselves each with a double barrelled revolver and a rifle, and
The old boatswain was left alone, but he had plenty to do. He began
nor an American ship should first touch the Pole.
by flinging down one article after another--P.120]
Hatteras had to brandish his knife vigorously, to ward off a
"The Doctor!" replied Johnson, pointing to the empty
hug.
To tell the simple truth, however, it was not their own danger that
"But suppose he was too far away to hear them," replied
by listening attentively in each room, so as to be able to resist
no prospect of a termination. The question of a sortie began now to
hold of it, and we shall be able easily to fire across it without
"Let us repeat the dose," said Hatteras, carefully stopping up




"If that is the case," said Altamont, "we must get out at all

They had been working away at this for some minutes, and Bell was


here."
Hatteras and the others followed his example, and Johnson took care

far more uneasy about you than you could have been about me."
bears working away like beavers. They were prowling about the snow,

A substantial meal was soon before him, but the vivacious little man

reach the powder-magazine without letting them see us."

purposely."
"Well, really," said Johnson, "the more I think of it, the


part of the stake, sufficiently long to reach the powder stores.
"See! By hauling in this rope we lower the post which props up the
the why and wherefore of everything.
"No, that might miss fire."
said the Doctor, smiling, "if they cant help a man at a pinch
By nine oclock everything was ready. It was high time, for the

sent along the lines right into the keg of powder. A formidable
AN ARCTIC SPRING.

of the bay, and mice in such abundance that their burrows completely
Arctic wolves closely resemble dogs, and their barking would deceive


"He can defend himself pretty well," said Bell, rubbing his face.

heat, and accounts for the low temperature. Both theories are
with the captain on an important subject--the building of a sloop
best, indeed my only friend."

may terminate abruptly; we have no proof that it stretches right
even his life, to win fresh glory for his country, but because the
I detest; I hate him with a thorough English hatred. Fate has thrown
the North-West Passage? But anyway, Altamont is in complete
Altamont will come with us; he must come. But we need not disclose


There was no lack of wood, for, shattered as the old
one evening when he was going over all the old familiar arguments in
discovery?"
was caught among the bergs and could not get away; but didnt he
them!"
better than you, and I can state them impartially."
"It was in 1848," he said, "that two vessels, the Herald and

in Winter Harbour was a cairn, which contained a document, stating
leaving, and the day fixed, when McClure, who was out walking with
Phoenix, and reached London safely on the 7th of October, 1853,
"No," replied Clawbonny, "for, at the close of the fourth
"You may easily do that," returned the American. "It is four




averaging much above freezing point.
solitary specimen was to be seen anywhere about Victoria Bay, and a
However, they went on in hope, after a good breakfast and
"I tell you what," said the Doctor, "a few enterprising
He was right, for presently three or four young hares, gambolling
"You say whats true, Clawbonny. Let them live!" replied
enchanter.
mere sight of such magnificent animals roused his hunting instincts,

Everything is grist that comes to his mill."
would not come to us like these hares, and partridges, and deer."

but they noticed a considerable change in the aspect of the country,
as belonging to the musk ox, or Ovibos genus, as naturalists call

the Doctor hid themselves behind projecting rocks, while Hatteras
Hatteras. He met their onset with a firm, steady foot, and fired

weapon, and throwing himself right in front of the raging animals.

at the peril of your own life, knowing quite well who I was."

"Altamont," said Hatteras, holding out his hand; "be our
The good little man was beside himself with joy He hugged the
steps to Fort Providence.
This was joyous news to the sailors, and they shook hands warmly
tempest came in quick succession for several days.
Bell undertaking the necessary repairs of the sledge.
would have pursued; he was intently watching beside a seal hole with
Next minute up came the seal, but his head no sooner appeared above

little; but, by attending to the Doctors wise counsels, they had
very happy hours there, and the Doctor made a touching reference to


Hunting was not forgotten during the march, for fresh meat was a

on the snow, which threatened them with snow-blindness. At another
this they must be near the Polar Basin, and yet far as the eye could


The travellers had to be very careful in avoiding hills, and even in

corpuscles, about the nature of which for a long time chemists could
peculiar effect, lighting up men, and animals, and rocks with a
and then the country resumed its usual aspect.
misadventure, however, befel the party during the darkness, except


"There is no doubt of it."

He was interrupted by an exclamation from the Doctor, who had just

"It seems to me," said the Doctor, during a brief lull in the

shouted simultaneously, "The sea! the sea!"--P.206]
unknown ocean," exclaimed Hatteras.
On the east and west the coast formed two capes or headlands, which
the tent, and what was required for the nights encampment.

began to examine the telescope, the object glass was gone!
"What?" said Hatteras, "strangers here?"
"We had lost ourselves in the fog, and been wandering in a
was favourable, but there was little of it, and the weather was
fathomless depths. These depths were lighted up, no doubt, by some
naturalist, but he found his science greatly at fault, for many a
a peculiar whizzing noise; dolphins, seals, and walruses; sea-dogs

astonishing that the sea should be open in these summer months.

an hours scrutiny through his telescope, he could make nothing of

"Undoubtedly."

towards the south with outspread wings. Was it, then, so
spite of himself, he was soon, like his companions, locked fast in
water which was constantly dashing over the ship.
stilled as if miraculously, and the sea became smooth as glass.
flames so near."
The Doctor was right. Gradually the fog began to lose its light, and
At last they began evidently to near the coast. Strange symptoms
keep tacking; but every few minutes the little sloop would be thrown
together, and evidently beside themselves with terror.
[Illustration: Mast and sail were torn off, and went flying away
suddenly the ship rose perpendicularly, her prow went above the edge
THE ENGLISH FLAG

morning on the 11th of July, the wind fell, and the sea gradually
torrents. In one part, serpents of fire seemed writhing and
Above the panting flames waved an immense plume-shaped cloud of
It seemed to rise gradually out of the water as the boat got nearer.
He had no heart now for anything. The North Pole was indeed before
manner, as if calling on the cruel sea and stony rocks to yield up

"Hatteras! Hatteras!" cried the Doctor, throwing himself on the
For a few minutes the joy of recovery of their captain filled all

A place of encampment must therefore be fixed upon immediately.
89 59 15". The longitude was of little importance, for all
15" was discovered Queens Island at the North Pole, by Captain
"JOHNSON, Boatswain
sufferings and perils were forgotten in the glow of success.

to be interrupted, we should fall right into the sun in sixty-four

"And quite right too," said Altamont.
they could, and lay down to sleep.
Whatever might be the cause, he could not sleep; yet this first
The Doctor went towards him and spoke, but it was long before he
Just then Altamont and the others came up, and their appearance





At last the Doctor recovered himself, and began to urge and entreat

ascent; the sky was splendid, and the thermometer stood at 52.

its bosom.

The ascent had occupied three hours already. Hatteras showed no


certainly have lost his life if the others had not held him back by
behind, and the travellers would see some enormous rock rebounding
red glare. A cry of agony escaped the Doctor; but an instant
rate, and would, perhaps, recover his senses, and expose himself to
stood waving his flag amidst showers of stones which rained down on
moment when he disappeared in the abyss.
"Insane!" exclaimed Johnson and Altamont, in consternation.




Providence. But what a scene of devastation met their eyes!
"Yes," said Altamont; "let us collect what food remains, and
Besides, they found a little shooting, and brought down ducks, and
be lost, for soon the open water would harden to firm ground;
they were obliged to stop or return, they were lost.
were in 7715 latitude, and 85 2 longitude.

through Jones Sound, and were obliged to follow the coast to
is extremely wild and rugged, and the path across the Trauter
up the tent, so they took shelter behind an iceberg.
He had been absent about an hour, and only once during that time had
"Dead--frozen--and even--"
The Doctor stooped down to look at them more closely, but instantly
certain horrible remains it was manifest that the poor wretches had
beneath the polar snows.
the survivors of the expedition. Even the men themselves were never



Forward were picked up by the Hans Christian, a Danish whaler, on
admitted to the next
The Doctor and his companions had the honour of being presented to
the next year under the auspices of the Royal Geographical Society,
one direction in a particular part of the garden. When he got to the
The End.
Asiatic coast, from the Indus to the Persian Gulf--Eudoxus
Hanno left Carthage with a fleet of sixty vessels of fifty oars each,
banks. He only waited to conclude a treaty of alliance with them,
Twelve days after this unsuccessful expedition, the fleet reached a
called Notu Keras, and, according to M. DAvezac, this gulf must

that time, and, still young, he left home with a view of exploring
Busiris (whose ruins may still be seen near Bushir), and of the
the two Pyramids which are situated a little above the lake. He
Herodotus furnishes us with some very valuable information on Lybian
the longevity of the natives. There can be no doubt, however, that
it both Assyria and Babylonia, but he gives a most minute account of

of other nations, their love of pleasure, their warlike qualities,
industrious race, employed themselves in collecting the auriferous
his most striking characteristics.
eyes of their prisoners was practised among them, and he notices
took place, which explains the reason why the young women of that
when he returned to Halicarnassus in Caria, for it was in B.C. 456
at once a traveller, geographer, and historian, one of the most
two hours. After six days further sailing, he came to lands which he
all the coast of Asia from the mouth of the Indus to that of the
days he had scarcely made eighty miles in a westerly direction. He
beards, who are more like bears or satyrs than human beings." Up to
the height of summer this phenomenon could not have taken place, and
but little resistance. Canasida, or Churbar as we call it, was their

he disembarked at once, and hastened to meet it. No news of the
they advanced along the Persian coast, they visited different places,

set sail upon the unknown waters of the Atlantic. How far he took



predecessors, published a celebrated geography, in which, for the
Athens and its monuments, tombs, temples, citadel, academy, columns,

After seventeen days march they reached the Lake of Lobnor in
The feast over, the monks left Khotan for Koukonyar, and after
Cabul and the Indus, and twenty-four leagues farther west, they came
great salt desert which lies to the east of the Indus, travelled
have given sight to five hundred blind men. They are said to have

he landed at the town of Chantoung of the present day; then having
It gives no details of its authors voyages, but begins with
From the earliest times of the Christian era there has been a great
basilica of Constantine on the site of the place where the real
[Illustration: Absaloms Tomb.]
resting upon it, threw them up again before the workmen. Beyond this,
visited the oak of Mamre, under which Abraham received the visit of
water, he viewed the source of the Jordan, at the foot of Libanus,
joined to it again by the jetty or pier made by the orders of
Rome, and was so set upon this, that it induced his father, brother,
where they visited the tombs of St. John the Evangelist, of Mary
to life the son of the nobleman; Bethsaida in Galilee, the native
This was not to be the limit of their exploration, for we hear of
the first and ninth centuries, by giving a short account of Soleyman,
enormous size, probably a spermaceti whale, which the seamen
upon human beings; this is thought to have been a kind of dog-fish.
interesting manner by later authors.
sufficiently understood. Ships could sail with more safety when the

accounts, they had gone as far as the White Sea and visited the
goat, was able to cross on foot from Norway to Greenland. We should

Lateran, but his descriptions are not interesting. From Rome by
Corinth, Thebes, whose two thousand Jewish inhabitants were the best
rests upon the monarchs head as he sits upon the throne." In this
silk manufacturers, but the Turks have a bitter hatred for them, and
the Archipelago, Mitylene, Chios, whence there was much trade in the
Jews, Syrians, Greeks, Georgians, and Franks of all languages and
Jews to do who passed by it; and from Bethlehem, after counting
and of all the surrounding country, this is the most fertile spot.

a large town three miles in circumference, containing a hospital
different route which was carefully guarded all the rest of the year,
miles in circumference; its length is two hundred and forty cubits.
thence to Bassorah on the Tigris, nearly at the end of the Persian
of the traveller becomes somewhat obscure; according to his notes we
vessels are lost on it, giving the following singular expedient for
arrives in Abyssinia, which he styles "the India that is on terra
Alexandria, built by Alexander the Great, a city of great commerce,
Messina. He wished to continue the census that he was making, so by
that we have given, on any atlas of the present day.

the Lithuanians, who scoured the country at that time.
them on the road, they travelled night and day, and thus passed
throne, and the papal letters, translated into a language composed
the hard yoke of the Mongolians.
days rest before encountering the cold and mountainous country of
were on horseback in the neighbouring fields and on the hills. The
the envoys were obliged to wait patiently for this before they could
the melting of the enormous mass of hail-stones that had fallen. It
in the dress of the men and women, all alike wearing long robes
saddled and bridled, a table, a dish of meat, a cup of mares milk,
milk of the mare, sheep, goat, cow, and camel. They have neither
residence at Syra-Orda while he was awaiting the Emperors election.
As soon as this ceremony was over, Carpini and Stephen were
arrived at the court of Prince Bathy, who gave them free passes, and
attacked them on the side nearest to Persia, and thus caused a
Thus equipped they set out and were much surprised next day by
wives, each of whom possessed a palace of her own, some houses, and
being impossible for Rubruquis to form any opinion as to Sartachs
Uigurs, they arrived at Karakorum, the capital of the Mongolian
which was situated on the further side of the mountains which rise
mines of Bocol. The prisoners were well treated by the Tartars, and
leaving the capital of the Mongols, he returned by the same route as

leaves his father Nicholas and his uncle Matteo for the residence of
These two Venetians belonged to the family of Polo, which had come
conqueror of Persia, the two brothers, not wishing to be in the
happening in Europe, requiring details of the government of the
Turkish language, asking the Pope to send a hundred learned men to
Theobald lived in Acre and received the Venetians; learning what was
could not then have been more than seventeen. At Acre they had an
before they were made prisoners by the soldiers of the Mameluke
describes, simply pointing out what the traveller learnt by hearsay,

are now cowardly and wretched, their only talent seeming to lie in
right shoulders." The Georgians, he describes as good archers and

Marco Polo went next to Yezd, the most easterly town of Persia
After travelling for five days they entered the beautiful and well
across which, 1500 years before, Alexander had led his army to meet
modern Koundouz. In this part of the country he says porcupines
must have been a long one to have enabled him to observe so many of
From Kashgar, Marco Polo diverged a little to the west, to Samarcand,
After spending a year crossing this desert, Marco Polo reached
Tcha-tcheou, and went eastward across Tangaut, by the town of So-ceu,
geographical studies to complete, which is proved by his spending
tract of country where grazed great wild oxen and the valuable
occupying his summer palace beyond the great wall, north of Pekin,
what they do is done by the aid of the devil, but they make others

Cambaluc, or, as it is now called, Pekin. When Marco Polo arrived at
the south side are five doors, the middle or large door only being
[Illustration: The Emperors palace at Pekin.]
crystal, and the roof is so well built that it will last for many
his elephants, with the roots and surrounding soil, the size of the
real ceremonies, and etiquette is most rigidly enforced. His table
Christians, offered up public prayers. At the second of these ftes,
animals, eagles strong enough to chase wolves, foxes, fallow and
The emperor lives thus till about Easter, hunting cranes, swans,
cut into various thicknesses according to the value of the money it
central city a great number of roads diverge to the various parts of

applying at the palace for it; it is computed that at least 30,000
the Coromandel and Malabar coasts, and a part of Cochin-China near
Yung-tchang--Mien--Bengal--Annam--Tai-ping--Cintingui--Sindifoo--
industry in the towns was the making of armour for the emperors use.
In eight days he reached the fine city of Quangianfoo, the ancient
the soil that according to a French traveller, M. E. Simon, an acre
by a vast number of vessels. Five days after leaving this busy,
become heated and split, and the sap hisses, the sound is heard at

with garlic sauce and good spices. This country is infested with
tradesmen carry their goods about on barrows like the bakers in
be, perhaps, the old town of Ava now in ruins, or the old town of
faces, necks, bellies, hands, legs, and bodies, and he who had the
beyond the Ganges, and returning towards China. In fact, Marco Polo
enough to attack these lions; it requires two dogs and a man to
As we return to the route that M. Pauthier has traced on his map, we
Polo was not more than a league from the mouth of this great river.
for there are a quantity of nurses. When a rich man had no sons, he
on the banks of the Yellow River, where the principal industry is
confounded with Nan-kin of the present day. Its modern name is
thriving city; and Singui, now called Soo-choo, a large town, which,
It is the residence of a viceroy, who has besides, 140 other cities
cruel warlike race, never sparing their enemies, of whom, after they
and the Persian ambassadors--Sai-gon--Java--Condor--Bintang--
of clearness as to dates at this part of his life, which makes it
in the service of Kubla-Khan, and even longer absent from their own
numerous suite; but the countries by which they endeavoured to
princess and the Persian ambassadors, and it was during this voyage,
Tchampa was under the dominion of the grand khan, and paid him an
luxuriantly; and here wild elephants and rhinoceroses (called by
"This island," says the traveller in his narrative, "was once much
province on the coast of India. This must not be mistaken for
The next resting-place of the fleet was Muftili, of which the
them alight to eat the meat, they raise fearful cries, the meat is
however, but remarkably sincere, and never guilty of theft of any
quantity of sandal-wood and indigo is found, and merchants come in
spices, a fine kind of cloth called buckram and other valuable
shores of Arabia, where he stopped at the Male and Female Islands,
opposing currents which take them always southwards. Nevertheless,
maximus_.]

horses are exported; Dafar, which produces incense of the finest
pieces, which he gives at the close of his narrative, and they form
friends never expected to see them again. They went to their own
robes of splendid silk damask, which they proceeded to tear, and to
So celebrated a man as Marco Polo could not escape civic honours. He
were anxious to hear the account of his travels. It was during his
his statements. Until the middle of the eighteenth century, the
Yemen--Abyssinia--The country of the Berbers--Zanguebar--Ormuz--
language."

heard and answered. On leaving Damascus, Ibn Batuta went to Mesjid,
to visit the towns of Yemen. He went as far as Aden, at the mouth of
Red Sea and following the coast of Arabia, he came to Zafar, a town
After Anatolia, the Arabian narrative speaks of Asia Minor. Ibn
rung with such spirit that he says, "even the horizon seemed full of
widen considerably.
most westerly point reached by the traveller; he now resolved to
were attached to the post, but these honours were not to be of any
whither; but his courage and hopefulness did not forsake him, and he
like a separate village, and some merchants were the possessors of a
Ibn soon made up his mind what to do. Leaving the service of the
long! This historian also adds that while one of the feet of our
But his vessel was seized by pirates, and Ibn Batuta arrived at
the Chinese provinces, and went first to the splendid town of Zaitem,
touching at Calicut and Ormuz, he returned to Mecca in 1348, having
ranked next after Marco Polo, the illustrious Venetian.
Ferro Island--Palma Island.
son of one of the Numidian kings, is said to have been their first
project to him, they decided to go to the Canary Islands together.
who were more courageous.
The traveller, prior to disclosing his plans of conquest, wished to
Gadifer was forced to return, and he went to the island of Lobos
against the governor, who, quite innocent of Bernevals base designs,
Berneval gave them up to some Spanish thieves, who took them away to
perishing on the island of Lobos for want of food and fresh water,
could have expected such wickedness in one who was looked upon as

be able to deceive Bthencourt, but he had not reckoned upon a
these islands, I beg you to receive the homage of your humble
of Castille.
chains.
he concealed his displeasure, and gave the new comers a hearty
climbed a hill. At the summit he found about fifty natives, who
were very much on their guard with the strangers, for twenty years
its fertility. Quails were found in large numbers, as well as pigs,
now came daily to cast themselves on their mercy, and to pray for
Ferro, and Palma Islands--Maciot appointed Governor of the
with an exhortation to believe the ten commandments, the Holy

feel sure will quite content you."

Gadifer was much disappointed at his want of success, and began to
Islands which he had so fondly hoped to conquer for himself.
succeeded. He sent for several of his men from Lancerota, and gave
Hannibal with regard to some native prisoners whom Gadifers
word that they would be well received if they would come to him.
absence. He set out on the last day of January amid the prayers and
He was received with trumpets, clarionets, tambourines, harps, and
Courtois had rebuilt.
made an expedition twenty-four miles inland, and seized some natives
that without any means of improving it. Its inhabitants form a large
to subdue Palma. The natives of this island were very clever in


each other as brothers, and specially try that there shall be no
kings to appear before him two days before his departure, to tell
waded into the water, and tried to stop the vessel that carried him
were prepared as Bthencourt had requested, and Albert des Maisons
life.
front of the high altar."
distance between Europe and Asia--Birth of Christopher Columbus--His
education of the new. Was it equal to the task, with its ideas still
countries where monsters abounded and gold was scattered over the
possibility of circumnavigating Africa, and thus reaching India.
navigators, was first doubled by the two Portuguese sailors,
people, and was a disgrace to humanity.
successive voyages, went further south than any preceding navigator,
commanded by his brother Pedro Diaz. We have no record of the
the bay "dos Vaquieros," so named from the numbers of horned animals
his firmness of purpose that he was able to reach a river, 75 miles
to India was open at last, and his vast plans for the extension of
expedition that was sent to double the cape which Diaz had
vengeance on him who first comes to brave me in my dwelling."
that day, for Cooley says, "The principal object of Portuguese
The route to India, China, and Japan (countries already known
existence of an obstacle 9750 miles in length, lying between Europe
aware of the 15,000 miles of ocean separating Europe from Asia, they
the chronicler Herrera, "and not resembling Christians."

needed one single intelligence to collect together and assimilate
Columbus, a manufacturer of woollen stuffs, seems, however, to have
be gathered from contemporary documents and from the writings of
himself and deeply interested in the geographical ideas of the day.
shores of the old Continent. He wrote frequently to the most

upon the violence of the storms which they might encounter; the
more loses sight of him, and she has preserved to posterity the
to believe in the genius of Christopher Columbus. Juan Perez showed
trial, did not despair. He felt within him the sacred fire of genius,
truth was, that his ideas interfered with the intolerant religious
[Illustration: Building a caravel.]
doubt ready to quit, and for ever, this ungrateful country, but
merchandise of whatever kind, which might be acquired in any manner
to separate himself afar from those familiar shores, which, until
being frightened at the enterprise, but at last the captains
Hispaniola or San Domingo--Tortuga Island--The cacique on board the
him of the existence of an unknown land in the west of the
expressed it.
the presence of submarine rocks, and not of the shores of a
superior to all human weaknesses, the courage of the sailors revived,
they had made 1272 miles to the west since leaving Ferro; in reality,
as it went down dipped behind an interminable horizon of water. The
given by Columbus himself which lends them the smallest credibility.
employed upon these things. Almost at the same moment, the men of
race experienced a similar emotion to that now felt by the great
discovered coast. Columbus had his long boat lowered, and got into
to several amongst them, coloured caps, and also glass beads, which
colour being neither black nor white, but similar to that of the
them prisoners for slaves; they would be faithful and gentle
natural plumage. The scarlet coat of the admiral excited their
precious metal derived from the island itself? Upon this point the
and thus, as we have already remarked, the great navigator after
humanity, he carried away some of the natives, that he might take
natives, however, proved to be of the same race as those of San
formed a grand natural harbour, capable of containing a hundred
Spaniards were never tired of admiring the new type of nature
winds permitted, the fleet weighed anchor. On Thursday, the 25th of
consented to barter their goods with the Spaniards. Columbus
pearls might be obtained in abundance. They added that men lived
no vestige of him.
towns, armies, enormous wealth, and his rle would no doubt have
thither Columbus resolved to go, but Martin-Alonzo Pinzon, the
instead of continuing his route to the south turned off to the east,
which fluttered amongst the beautiful trees of the island, all
country produced. The sailors returned to the ships enchanted with
young man of twenty years of age; he was naked, like his subjects of
dishes and goblets to the members of his suite; he had good manners,
sheltered, hidden between the island and the Bay of Acul, and to
first visited; in the opinion of Columbus, the paint, red, black, or
deck; he ordered an anchor to be fastened forward, by which the ship
admiral, and to place all his own possessions at his disposal, at
flotilla since November 21st. The natives announced that she was at
included a writer, an alguazil, a cooper, a doctor, and a tailor.
_Pinta_ had done nothing but coast along the shores of Hispaniola,
of La Roca, French Cape, Cape Cabron, and the Bay of Samana,
carrying off with him. His crews, embittered and fatigued, caused
storm raged with redoubled fury, and even the admiral feared for the
made by Columbus. The admiral put to sea again on the 23rd of

baptized in presence of the whole court; and thus, the man of genius,
Columbus brother, named Governor of the Island--Jamaica--The Coast
therefore, ready to start.
all sails set, amidst the acclamations of an immense crowd of people
had only heard a rumour during the first voyage."
Some Indian women were carried off by the sailors, but, after having
and as Marco Polo had mentioned an Asiatic country which possessed
towards them, extending their arms in supplication, and praying for
of a lion, who followed her.
the admirals ship they showed no less ferociousness and atrocity of
dozen uninhabited huts. The admiral put to sea again, and sailed
his companions, he went on shore. What was his dismay, when he found
Columbus did not believe in this intervention of the cacique, but,
success of his first attempt, Columbus had resolved to found a new
Columbus was now anxious to send news of the colony to the King and
crossed successively mountains and valleys, where often the pick-axe
Columbus left fifty-six men to guard the Fort of St. Thomas, under
Don Diego, to govern the colony, he set out on the 24th of April
sixty-six miles. During this dangerous navigation amongst shallows
having a body like a great eel, and upon the back of his head a very
board the boat, and fasten the fish-hunter with as much of rope as
to be simply an optical illusion; these so-called monks turning out
inhabitants. But I hold it my duty to exhort and to warn thee that
precepts indicated by their chief. Land was common property amongst
Isabella, where, under the influence of good air and repose, and the
have further instances in the future, carried off the cacique from
share he had had in the murder of the first colonists, alone
to their side; the rebels destroyed all the fields of maize, and
against all these attacks, Columbus, being absent, could not defend
caravels at Hispaniola, but Columbus, who had returned to the colony,
Cibao, the other upon the banks of the River Hayna. Having taken
took part against him. Discouraged as they were, with illusions
merit of his discoveries, he proposed the experiment of making an
Columbus--Insubordination in the Colony--Complaints in Spain--
concession besides, that all the punishments in use in Spain should
Antonio Columbus, one of his own relations, while he, with a large
to the Point of Alcatraz, and the admiral sent some of his sailors
caravels, whose pilot endeavoured to reassure them by steering
the open sea, was exposed to great peril in this gulf, where the

much gold and pearls were to be obtained. Here the admiral would
spot was situated that terrestrial Paradise once inhabited by Adam
the populous Island of Margarita, and afterwards the Island of
brother to lay the foundations of a new town. With this end Don
commissioned to inform the king of the new discoveries, and of the
de Bovadilla, to whom were given the titles of Governor-general, and
and having read them, he declared his willingness to recognize him
solemn conventions signed by Ferdinand and Isabella, was not even
which Columbus was exposed, wished to strike off his chains; but
court.
affectionate words; in assuring Columbus of her protection, she
in spite of its short duration, had not been without fruit, but had
Putting into port at Jamaica--Distress--Revolt of the Spaniards
population of Hispaniola, sensibly decreased.
that by sailing to India by the much safer and shorter western route,
Columbus left Cadiz on the 9th of May, 1502, with crews numbering in
man, a knight of the order of Alcantara, named Nicholas Ovando. His
ships to founder with all on board. Bovadilla was drowned, and with
was driven towards the coast of Cuba, which led to the discovery of
Truxillo, as far as the Gulf of Darien. Each night he cast anchor,
thinking that each moment might prove their last. I have seen many
me no profit, and I find myself to-day unpossessed of even a roof to
anchored opposite to the village of Cariaz. There he remained until
purpose to prolong the stay at El Retrete. Upon quitting this
prayed for death as putting a term to their miseries; my ships
In spite of all this, the admiral, who never forgot the principal
some wooden barracks constructed.
ships. Hitherto the relations with the natives had been peaceable,
One day, exhausted by fatigue, he fell asleep, and heard a pitying
placed at the entrance of the ocean; they were formed of chains
new interpretation to His desires; it is not He who seeks to give to
sufficiently numerous to justify the risk of leaving a part of them
make head against the winds which drove him to the north-west nearly

boldness of a proposal, which under other circumstances he would
must have acted under orders from the king. These absurd reasonings
eastern extremity of the island. Arrived there, with no respect left
distress increased, and famine threatened. The natives wearied of
the latter announced to them that God, desirous of punishing them
night shone forth in all her splendour. From that day forward, the
did not even land, but contented himself with putting on shore, for
unfortunate natives. Columbus proposed to restore them to favour,
physical, they set sail for Hispaniola. Arrived in harbour, after a

Castilian town, Camon de los Condes, in exchange for his titles and
canon substituted some other remains for those of Christopher
San Domingo or at Havana; his name and his glory are everywhere.

Mussulmans and Arabs, and through them from the Venetians, in order
foot of Sinai, where they were able to procure some valuable
friendly welcome they accorded to the traveller would bring about in
gave his notes, the itinerary of his journey, and a map of Africa
re-echoed his complaints and his grief.
Algarve, and commander of Seizal, occupied a high position at the
safe-conduct to Tangier granted in 1478 to two persons, Vasco da
clear proof that Gamas valour and cleverness were highly
certainty for Saturday, the 8th of July, 1497.
board the _Sam-Raphael_ of 100 tons. A caravel of 50 tons, the
him were a number of monks and religious persons, who chanted sacred

appeared to prize, wearing in their ears small chains of that metal.
thirteen days, during which time the boat which carried the stores
What shall we say to this little fte and this mutual serenade
The ships had sustained some damage, and fresh water was needed; it
to visit the Portuguese, with a young man who, "from what could be
was assured that in pursuing the line of the coast, he would find
Portuguese by treachery, and killing them. Gama was obliged to point
during the night, the flag-ship was approached by a _zacra_, having

blue. The reception of the Portuguese at Melinda was at first very
Faithful to the promise which he had made to Vasco da Gama, the king
last they had arrived in those rich and wonderful countries.
gave a short account of the voyage of the fleet. Mouada returned
expose the expedition, the Capitam mr set out for the shore, upon
narrative is called the "Zamorin," was awaiting them with extreme
and that he would, by the aid of Gama, send ambassadors to Portugal.
filled with oil, and two with honey," certainly did not constitute a

take him off to the ships, and was forced to sleep on shore. The
merchandise, the admiral would long ago have returned on board his
king, reminding him of his promise to send an embassy to Portugal,
prisoners. The kings reply not being sent within the time specified
On the morrow, Mouada the Moor of Tunis who had served as
to meet the Hindoos, who made the greatest haste to flee from him,
hitherto, excited the suspicions of the Portuguese, and they were
themselves were forced to lend a hand. "Whence I can affirm," says
provisions and oranges for the invalids on board. The reception
the Cape of Good Hope, when they again found themselves upon the
ships to Joao da Saa, and chartered a fast-sailing caravel, to
Gama. He then bestowed upon him the title of Admiral of the Indies,
The King of Cochin--The early life of Albuquerque--The taking of
lady in waiting to the Infanta Dona Maria, daughter of John III. If
of Gama, and did not wish to give him the opportunity of increasing
countries of Asia.

gentlemen of Europe carry their hawks or their gerfalcons.
well as the manners and customs of the inhabitants. These wise and
a horrible scene was disclosed. The water looked thick and black,
engulfed by a gigantic water-spout during the last days of the storm.
Quiloa for a wholesale massacre of the Europeans, but this was
privilege. For some time the Moors dissembled their resentment, but
visit to Cananore, where he entered into a treaty with the Rajah of

board 1000 hundredweights of pepper, 50 of ginger, and 450 of
Europe.
various seeds of fruits and vegetables. It must be added that this
the country. But to whom should such an important mission be

quite in accordance with the ideas of the period, was calculated
arrival in the Indies of his formidable enemies, he had taken no
Accordingly, under cover of the night, the broadsides of the vessels

Gama, who had just laid the foundations of the colonial empire of
risk. Sodrez and several of his captains had deserted the post,
promise him pardon and oblivion of his offences if he would give up
dAlbuquerque, who had sailed from Lisbon almost at the same time as
witnessed the arrival of Alfonzo dAlbuquerque, the man destined to
explorers. Brought up at the court of Alphonzo V., he there received
incursion of the Turks, and in 1489, had been charged with the
Zamorins troops to flight. The importance of this victory was
to assure the triumph of his countrymen.
degrees 21 minutes west longitude, Da Cunha discovered three small
end, thanks to the courage of the enemy and the perfection of their
the Indies, which was the most used by the Venetians.
captains under his orders, and notably of Joao da Nova, who
Persian Gulf, which was the second of the great commercial roads
was a very great affair, but that it was too late to draw back, and
capital; but the admiral, who guessed his object, did not hesitate,
declared himself the vassal of King Emmanuel, promised to pay him an
thinking himself too weak to undertake anything, he retired for a
vanity of which he gave so many proofs, assumed the title of viceroy.

upon the Malabar coast, for all Mussulman soldiers coming from
viceroy received the news of his being replaced in his office by
but yield, and he then did it nobly. As for Joao da Nova, the author
succeeded in rallying their troops. Coutinho, whose impetuous valour
of this counsel. The situation of Goa, giving access as it did to
those spices which people went so far to seek, and for whose
companions in the hands of the Malays. These events had already

built of stone, which stretched out in a long panorama for the
change in the trade-wind,--a change which would force the Portuguese
quarter by quarter, house by house, after a truly heroic struggle
unbridled audacity, and indomitable courage of a nation whose
Albuquerque forget his former projects. If he had appeared to have
a treaty, and to send the arrears of the tribute which had been
quarrel which was then dividing the town of Ormuz and preparing it
shells, should be brought from his ships, and showing them to the
labours, Albuquerque had desired some of his lieutenants to explore
postponed.
having defended Goa against the Portuguese, than to myself for
a time when he was suffering much from disease. "He raised his hands
Albuquerque was buried with great pomp. The soldiers who had been
towards him. "With Albuquerque," says Michelet, "all humanity and

END OF THE FIRST PART.
Hojeda--Americus Vespucius--The New World named after him--Juan de
and four years later it became necessary to repeat the prohibition
seem to have been astronomer to the fleet.
Columbus remains a mystery; it appears still more inexplicable when
As specimens of La Cosas talent in drawing maps may be mentioned
ill-digested. He left Florence in 1492 without any special aim in
instituted by the Treasury with the heirs of Columbus.
to Cape _La Vela_. Then, after touching at the Caribbee Islands,
prevailed upon him to leave the island. "He took with him," says Las
in studying the history of the discovery of America, in his opinion
Columbus against the Spanish Government, in which the priority of
letters which have given endless work to commentators. Humboldt says
continent, whose coast-line he had explored for so great a distance.
the American shores from Cape St. Augustine to 52 degrees of south
at least as one far removed from want. He died at Seville on the
addressed to Lorenzo de Pier Francesco de Medici, and a letter

Three other expeditions left Spain almost at the same time as that
and had shown so much jealousy of Columbus, even adopting the
some 2400 miles, discovering Cape St. Augustine at 8 degrees 20
having explored them, was really at the head of this expedition. The
stormy voyage, some of the vessels being lost on the way.
Indians as a herd of cattle, had divided them among the colonists as
torture them by burning them over a slow fire to extract from them
Paradise. "Are there any Spaniards in that land of happiness and joy
In 1504 and 1505 four vessels explored the Gulf of Urabia. This was
having always regarded it as part of the continent. Two years later
out his plans.
hitherto unknown to the Spaniards. Thus the strife became deadly. In
the oldest families in Spain, had arrived in Hispaniola with Ovando.
(Pques-Fleuries), or perhaps from its delightful aspect. Such a
Herrera, and Garcilasso de la Vega.
resistance from the natives of the Antilles, could not subjugate the


and this was the resistance which the savage inhabitants of this
twenty-five days of marching and fighting, they could see from the
of the camel. These interesting details, and the great quantity of
was odiously and judicially murdered by the orders of Pedrarias
to collect information upon Yucatan, sighted the year before by
encourage Grijalva to make any long stay amongst this warlike people.

Indians paid to their gods; they burnt copal incense before him, and
Grijalva put all the gold which he had collected on board one of the
where Bernal Diaz boasts of having sown the first orange-pips which
civilization than that existing in the Antilles, with the
Ferdinand Corts--His character--His appointment--Preparations for
time he fitted out a new armament proportioned to the dangers and
commander, while the latter preferred Augustin Bermudez or
power of looking into the future, Corts was certainly not the man
manner initiated into the Indian system of tactics, so also,
very athletic, and possessed powers of endurance, remarkable even
friends to purchase vessels, provisions, munitions of war, and
those who had accompanied Grijalva now hasten to serve under his
arrest Corts, but Pedro Barba the governor, felt the impossibility
the King of Spain--an enterprise from which he would have turned
After doubling Cape Catoche, Corts sailed down the Bay of Campeachy,
whom was the celebrated Marina, who rendered such signal services to
name of Montezuma, lived in Tenochtitlan, or Mexico, nearly 210
hearts of the savages with terror. During the whole time of the
to the Pacific than to the Atlantic, there is a huge basin at an
construction of the greater part of the sumptuous and gigantic
had been at first bounded by the extent of the valley, spread on all
affairs. Side by side with rites similar to those of Christians,
offering up of numerous human sacrifices. The Emperor Montezuma
salient point in the character of Corts, was completely wanting in
provisions and more extended powers. After this he received the
returning to Cuba, there would be constant lukewarmness and
common cause with him. He therefore asked for leave to cross their
with their hands cut off, and who yet after each victory not only
the Indians, and as the sanctuary and favoured residence of their
gave orders to make prisoners of all the principal men of the town,
despotism, and Corts felt confirmed in the hope that so divided an
his favourites in a kind of litter adorned with gold and feathers,
would come to visit them and to reform their laws--and if, as
canoes. This arrangement of the town of Mexico caused some anxiety
soldiers, it was only that he might wait for some favourable
Spaniards of his own free will; these words were needed to calm the
puppet-show of authority. Corts changed the governors who
should declare himself the vassal and tributary of Spain. The act of
expedition, the share of each soldier did not amount to 100 _pesos_,
Corts had succeeded in persuading Montezuma to conform to his will
undeceived, and learnt that this expedition was organized by Diego
information as to the forces, and the projects of Narvaez. The
and to whom he distributed a number of chains, gold rings, and other
choice between returning to Cuba, or remaining to share his fortune.
prevent. After having been joined by 2000 Tlascalans, Corts pressed
to prepare for their retreat. But when the unfortunate emperor, now

battlements, over which they threw themselves, hoping to drag him
they acted in the night.
Blinded and amazed, the allies knew not against whom to defend
putting himself at the head of those least severely wounded, plunged
The fugitives did not delay at Tacuba, and by accident they took the
battle. "Never had the Spaniards incurred greater danger," says
relief of Alvarado, we were in all 1300 men, including in that
Corts, it was because the former soldiers set out on the march
only allies which remained to them. Happily the fears which had
the Lake of Mexico, to be launched there at the moment when needed.
carried muskets, and forty horse-soldiers. With this small army, and
a man distinguished by his talents and courage.
brigantines were launched upon the water of the lake. The Mexicans
Spaniards on all sides with such fury that numbers of them were
Guatimozin was obliged by his councillors to quit Mexico and to set

[Illustration: The Spaniards stir the fire burning below the
character, and a few detachments of troops sufficed to reduce to
the city by granting them concessions of lands, and the Indians, by
founded settlements in all the parts of the country which appeared
foot-soldiers, on the 12th of October, 1524. After crossing the
del Castillo says, "The execution of Guatimozin was very unjust, and
upon his return to Mexico. At this time he entrusted to Alvarado the
Honduras--which had wasted so much time and caused almost as great
of America had been; here Corts met with Pizarro, then at the
not of a great vassal, but of an independent monarch."
the active habits of his past life, set out again for Mexico in 1530,
the Pacific. The latter expedition reached the southern extremity of
of the Californian Peninsula was made, and it was thus discovered
this journey was not destined at all to resemble the first. Grown
Algiers, Corts, who was serving in it as a volunteer, but whose
enterprise by its most difficult side."...
him as before. In finishing this portrait of the "conquistador," we

equal to the greatness of the undertaking. It must be confessed also
There lived, however, in Panama a man well able to weigh the truth
distinction, and also in Cuba; afterwards he accompanied Hojeda to
adventurers was by this time more than fifty years of age, and
One of the historians of the conquest of Peru, Augustin de Zarate,
having met with Pizarro, he went back northwards as far as _the
Catamez, a country moderately peopled and where they found abundance
perish uselessly in a rash enterprise; he even sent a boat to Cock
distance from the coast, to which he gave the name of Gorgona. There
spite of contrary winds and currents, until, after having discovered
description of it, and he caused some gold vases to be given up to
Pizarro resolved to apply to Charles V. before undertaking the
body of 250 men, and to provide himself with the necessary ships,
refused to take part in this new expedition; he was not pleased with
been carried by a storm 300 miles more to the south than he had
The effect which had been produced in Mexico by the sight of the
at the mouth of the Chilo, in order that vessels coming from Panama
Mama-Oello, and were of majestic appearance; according to Garcilasso
incas were to them quasi-divinities; they had but to place a thread
analogous to these? Must it not be regretted that the Spaniards

In 1526, when the Spaniards appeared on the coast for the first time,

advanced at once into the interior of the country, at the head of a
the mountains and became entangled in narrow defiles where a small
ornaments and vases made of gold and silver which they saw
of the honesty and simplicity of Atahualpa, who placed entire
shoulders of their servants, and he was surrounded by dancers and
supreme authority of the Pope, and to submit to the King of Castille
surprised to learn that Atahualpa understood almost nothing of the
me nothing." With this he flung the book upon the ground.
one of his own soldiers who was too precipitately endeavouring to
and ornaments of gold. Pizarro eagerly agreed to this, and the
deplorable mixture this of religion and profanity, too common

Almagro and Pizarro were at the same time both suitors and judges.
loudly against this perversion of justice, but their generous
reigned in the Peruvian camp, and the Spaniards resolved to take
there was a larger number to share in them?
that the province of Quito was not included in Pizarros command,
when some of the more moderate among the officers caused an

good face on the matter, and seemed delighted at a reconciliation.

greater part of the Spaniards, whereupon he immediately retraced his
possessions. Cuzco had the recommendation of having been the
remained in Cuzco itself but a very small body of troops. The inca,
expert in the use of the arms which they had taken from their
Lima, intercepted all communications, and annihilated the various
brothers of the "conquistador" should be put to death, and that
His adversaries did not delay to remind him of it. Whereas prompt
immediately set free, that Cuzco should be given back to the marquis,
he reckoned much on his splendid cavalry, whom he could not deploy
that the latter, witnesses of the defeat and dispersion of one of
As for Almagro himself, Ferdinand Pizarro, feeling convinced that
most sacred engagements had been laid bare without reserve, by some
years.
great cordiality, he had to sustain, as soon as harvest was over,
correspond with and express his sentiments. His valour, prudence,
months; they found only a scattered population, who were not
to descend the river until he reached the ocean. Such a voyage is
caused the river Maraon to be called the _River of the Amazons_. If,
perfidy. The bravest among Pizarros men were discouraged at the
Pizarro, gathered round the son of their old leader, and formed a
Francisco-Martin, the doctor Juan Velasquez, and a dozen servants.
kissed, and then yielded up his soul to God." Some negroes carried
extreme in Pizarro, and united in him to perfidy and duplicity. If
greater metallurgic advantage to Spain, and thus it was the more
Gonzalo Pizarro, which took place in 1548. His body was taken to
of the guilty--Magellans Strait--Patagonia--The Pacific--The
Peru, and Valdivia was conquering Chili, the solution of this
in the sacking of Quiloa, and in all the events of that campaign.
On his return to Portugal, Magellan obtained leave, though not
remainder of his life, and obliged him to return to Portugal.
legally set forth that he renounced his rights as a Portuguese
reach the Moluccas by a new way, but one which was not otherwise
expedition on condition that the greater part of the profits should
the 22nd of October, 1518, a disturbance paid for with Portuguese
Rey Faleiro, who had become almost childish, having returned to
Spain, and he obtained permission to take part in the voyage. This
called him on board the _Victoria_,) presented to Charles V., then
three French manuscripts of the sixteenth century, which give very
the _Sant-Antonio_, also of 120 tons, commanded by Juan de


After having passed between the Cape de Verd Islands and Africa, the
officer, and Carthagena in consequence was simply put under arrest,
visited also, four years before Magellans arrival, by Pero Lopez,
an interesting fact, and a singular avowal for an Italian of the
of the Pacific, among the Peruvians; it is curious to ascertain that
After remaining thirteen days in this place, the squadron continued
arm of the sea opening into the Pacific, the flotilla anchored at
ground four of our people who were behind him." He was taken back on
in the present day, but which had nothing revolting about it for the
of guanaquis and other game; they are endowed with such wonderful

Portuguese. The captain-general being one of the latter nation, had
among the sailors, when on Palm Sunday, the 1st of April, 1520,
openly to attack the commander-in-chief, and sent to him some
taken, not however without bloodshed. Mendozas body was divided
so persistently sought. At the level of Cape St. Croix, one of the
obtain any communication with the natives. The details which
Nothing is more extraordinary than the navigation of Magellan upon
Islands, but of which the position is indicated in much too
by colouring their teeth black and red, while their bodies were
goes by the name of Samar Island. There Magellan, resolving to give
Philip of Austria, son of Charles V.
signal service in several instances. The king came on board with six
leave of the captain, begging him to send two of his men with him,
natural tint was olive."
visit, and at the same time to take in some fresh provisions in

to invite him and his people to become converts to Christianity.
the sick mans house, whom we found really in a very sad state in
destroy all the idols, even those which were in use in the kings
account of the rocks and shallow water. More than 1500 natives
which was undefended. Magellan, wounded in the leg by a poisoned
Better versed than any one else in the knowledge of nautical charts,
glory of Magellan will survive his death."
merchandise. Serrano, Barbosa, and twenty-seven Spaniards were
transshipped all that was most precious on board the other vessels.
but with a rich population, who received them with magnificence.
succession through the mouths of three nobles, each of higher rank
arrack (the alcohol of rice), camphor, cinnamon, ginger, oranges,
those of the mulberry, but are not so long; the stalk is short and

the royal sceptre, two men who had each a golden vase full of water
Ternate and Tidor under the protection of the king of Spain.
burning, and would be almost unfit to breathe, if frequent rains did
enormous wild boar with long tusks bent backwards; the opossum, a
most curious information from him with regard to the expeditions
received a considerable stock of cloves from the king of Tidor. This
discharged and transported across the Isthmus to the Atlantic, where
As to the _Victoria_, she left Tidor richly laden under the command
miles further on, at Banda, where mace and nutmegs are found, then
bird the Epyornis, of which the bones and the enormous eggs were
After leaving greater Java, the _Victoria_ rounded the peninsula of

storm. To keep to this course required great perseverance on the
that the _Victoria_ was the only vessel of Magellans squadron which

Sebastian del Cano rapidly made the coast of Africa, and on the 6th
however, given to Sebastian del Cano; it was reserved for the

They were also the pilots of the Northmen, a name given generally to

lived on the shores of the North Sea and British Channel. Sometimes
Constantinople, establishing themselves later in Sicily, and leaving
instruct the idolatrous population.

to it, but the annual and great increase of the glaciers, has
put to sea, seeking at haphazard for a country of which he did not
accomplishment of their difficult task and hearing of the discovery
other productions of the country, set out for Greenland; he had made
they found themselves all at once surrounded by a numerous flotilla
In the spring of 1007, three vessels carrying 160 men and some
whom, from the manner in which they are portrayed, it is easy to
that relates to the Norman expeditions.
have confirmed facts already admitted, there is every reason to hope

which were not again reached until our own day. Thus at this time

thirty-three yards annually;--to the bad policy of the mother
About 1390, a certain Nicolo Zeno, a member of one of the most
old map, rotten with age, illustrative of his voyages. Of this he
straightforward truth of which he could thus ignorantly distort upon
the present names of the harbours and islands of this archipelago a
in a place "where was a monastery of the order of preaching friars,
An old sailor, who had returned with the Venetian, and who said he
Who knows, if in his voyage to England and during his wanderings as
fellow-countrymen and contemporaries of Columbus. If the Genoese
although it may be much more complete than that which can be met
dos Bacalhaos_--the land of cod-fish--which must really have been
caused a fine palace to be built in the town of Angra, where he
the commencement of the summer of 1500, and after having touched at
were painted in different colours according to taste, they wore
discoveries. But from this time he is never again mentioned. Michael
having acquired any information. When Vasco Annes, the last of the
shrouded by a mist which is not even now completely dissipated,
period of his birth. John Cabota, Caboto or Cabot must have been
"Sebastian Cabot told me that he was born at Bristol, and that at
it is said, to Mecca, and that while there he would learn from what
Genoese." At this time the whole of Europe resounded with the fame

to render assistance to the said Jehan, and to his sons.... Given

to the Indies, and in the end, I reached the country now called
continued his course to the south, not doubtless, as far as Florida
others were fitted out at the cost of the merchants of Bristol.
which the inhabitants, who were clothed in the skins of animals,
unproductive, we lose sight of Sebastian Cabot, if not completely,
Vespucius, which happened in 1512, Cabot was the navigator held in
probably obtained leave of absence. Eden tells us that the following
horrible plague, which put a stop even to commercial transactions.
particular country, made some overtures to Contarini, the Ambassador
of the spice trade, was not without its influence upon the
association of merchants who had defrayed the expenses of the
Cabot was not the man to allow himself to be annihilated by it; he
entrusting the command of it to Antonio de Grajeda. Cabot had the
victory had disabled twenty-five Spaniards. It was too much for
and again sailing up the Paraguay he reached Potosi, and the
in the Portuguese settlements on the coast of Brazil. It is to the

commerce was in the hands of the Hanseatic towns, Antwerp, Hamburg,
Cabot assembled some leading London merchants, laid his projects
A flotilla of three vessels was assembled at Deptford. They were the
recommends the use of the log-line, an instrument intended to
The squadron set sail on the 20th of May, 1558, in presence of the

exclusively continental, far from any frequented sea, isolated from
products, returned to England, carrying a letter from the Czar. The

forced to resign his office and his pension, both of which had been
discoverers. A figure lost in the shadow and vagueness of legends

We possess no biographical details with regard to Verrazzano. Under

miles, he discovers land at 30 degrees north latitude, which he
woven grasses, and ornamented with tails of other animals, which
could judge, abundance of stags, fallow deer and hares, numerous
twenty-five men in it. A young sailor jumped into the water "because
having shown a desire to return to the boat they reconducted him to
snared birds and used a bow of very hard wood, and arrows tipped
After remaining for three days in this enchanting place, the
"Some wore the skins of the lynx on their arms; their head was
esteem above everything else were fish-hooks, knives, and all
provisions, and having reconnoitred the coast of America for a
Perhaps when some learned man shall have looked through our archives
men. At the end of only twenty days, so favourable was the voyage,
wild beasts: as for all the land towards the north, I never saw as
entrance of the estuary of the St. Lawrence, where he saw some
he set out again for France, and landed at St. Malo on the 5th of
great river called Hochelaga, which leads to Canada. On the banks of
marvellous manner, which is a sign of joy and confidence, and when
Hochelaga or Montreal, which is 630 miles from the mouth of the St.
touch them, so thoroughly were they persuaded that he was a god
seem to have been in use throughout the whole extent of the New
February out of our 110 men there were but ten in good health."
Some time after, Cartier, having noticed that Donnacona was trying
The five vessels set sail on the 23rd of May, 1541. They met with
vegetated, and was nothing more than a factory until 1608, the date
help enabled him to equip a pinnace and two poor barks of from
which he had visited; he received, however, a most flattering
August, the strait which he had discovered during his previous
took one with her child, but left the other on account of her
from the Queen to shoot all kinds of birds, even swans, on the
there were bakers, carpenters, masons, gold-refiners, and others
fleet. Following upon this catastrophe, a sudden and horrible
squadron, he sailed along the west coast of Greenland, as far as the
This was the last Arctic voyage in which Frobisher took part. In

a dense fog, by the dash of the icebergs, and the splitting of the
During eleven days, Davis still sailed northwards on a very open sea,
and penetrated into the strait which bears his name as far as 69
existence of the passage to a species of certainty. Foreseeing,
southern entrance to Hudsons Bay. After coasting along the American
A new nation was just come into existence. The Dutch--while scarcely
in 1594, on board the _Mercure_, doubled the North Cape, saw the

first discover the north-east passage--fitted out two vessels, of
far-spreading land, which they took to be a part of Greenland, and
to descend the eastern coast, but were soon obliged to enter a
tent or hut, in which the men might be sheltered from the snow and
throughout the winter.
example even to the sailors of the present day. It may well be said
salted meat, and thus they might longer have escaped the attacks of
could imagine nothing else but that the water must be frozen quite
long corridor beneath the snow. Each night they first heard the
where these poor people were sleeping. It was necessary to thaw the
the chimney, to keep in the delightful warmth. And thus, each went

hard frost prevented the Dutchmen from leaving the house. They
After the 21st January, the foxes became less numerous, the bears
ship was still embedded in the ice. On the 15th of April, the
strong wind was blowing, Heemskerke went to seek Barentz, who had
in the midst of ceaselessly recurring dangers.
greatly, seeing that he was our principal leader, and our sole pilot,
blocks of ice; after having seen on various occasions the sea open,
great fields of ice which had given them so much trouble to avoid.
therefore to take to the open sea, in order to shorten the distance
_Jan Rijp_. Great was the astonishment of the Dutch at the sight of
September, Jan Rijp left the Kola River, and on the 1st November the
Afterwards each of us retired to his own house. Those who had not
although the Dutch were the conquerers, Heemskerke lost his life.
there were heaps of seal, bear, and walrus bones. Inside, everything

invented by Plancius, which served without doubt to determine the

sum, which was increased by the sale of a vessel bequeathed to him
sort of rehearsal of what was destined to take place in Mexico. Then
depended on. From July, 1572, to August, 1573, sometimes alone,
six vessels, on board of which were 160 picked sailors.
painted and diversified by several kinds of colours, and they each
sail from Port Desire, at which Drake arrived on the 2nd June. On
his men,--of having taken advantage of the opportunity to get rid of
one of his ships founder, while his last companion was separated
which obliged him to re-embark. At Arica he plundered three small
thought it time to return to England. For this, there were three


On the 13th of October, 1579, Drake arrived in latitude 8 degrees
enveloped from the shoulders with a long cloak of cloth of gold
loaded our vessels abundantly with these, being able to certify that
June, and after stopping at Sierra Leone to take in water, he

with great rapidity. If there are but very few discoveries due to
Spaniards. Having in 1585 obtained letters of mark, he made a cruise
having no wings, could not fly, and which fed upon fish. They are
fortress, then deserted and already falling into ruins. Its
strait, it encountered a violent storm, which dispersed it. The
the country and met with oxen, cows, wild horses, hares, and
Helena, and on the 9th September, 1588, anchored at Plymouth, after
obliged to put to sea again without having been able to revictual.
Formerly the Dutch had contented themselves with fetching from

companions had fallen victims. On the 25th December, one of the
They land upon the desert islands of Martin Vaz, again reach the
until the 20th December, after having been tried by many storms,
ten ostrich eggs. Captain Jacob Jansz Huy de Cooper, died during the
life. Nevertheless, could anything be more cruel than to abandon a
shirts, hats, and other articles of no great value. After ravaging,
off everything upon which they could lay their hands. One of them,
way with sails set on the foremast, across the heads which were to
[Illustration: Battle of Manilla. _From an old print_.]
after a campaign in the Low Countries against the Spaniards, he
may permit all the miserable people dying of hunger to provide for
not to quit England, for the life of patience and self-devotion of
Sherborne, he conceives the project of his voyage to Guiana. To his
the nature of the soil and the rocks which surround Lake Parima,
results of an expedition directed by a man so fool-hardy, and of a
February, 1595, with a small fleet of five vessels, and 100 soldiers,
without a blow, and carried off Berreo and the principal personages
says; "a soil dry and fertile, with game, and birds of every species
Orinoco, who have assured me that there exists an entire mountain of
various parts of the country. I had, however, some doubt as to the
_Thousand and one Nights_.

differing from that of the preceding century in the fact that nearly
why and wherefore of facts. They behold, curiosity is satisfied, and
empire.

da Gama, have completed the circumnavigation of Africa, some of them
converted the king and all his court. He had even soon acquired so
details upon the Church of Ethiopia and the manners of the
burning their idols, rebuking the kings for the time-honoured custom
Congo to the Courts of Rome and Lisbon. A map which accompanies this
of Africa_--so ran his official title--although he may be little
Brue about the history and migrations of these various people, is of
several unknown districts of the island are explored as well as the
regions so long closed against Europeans. In Cochin China and Tonkin,
penetrate into the Middle Empire. Their knowledge of mathematics and
The Dutch in the Spice Islands--Lemaire and Schouten--Tasman--
Far from founding colonies, or repairing and occupying the
established in Java, Sumatra, Borneo, the Moluccas, and at the Cape
Hoorn, provided the other half. They fitted out the _Concorde_, a
hope of obtaining enormous profits from them, and if heaven should
rigging took fire, and she was consumed in spite of the energetic
[Illustration: The sea was so encumbered with whales.]
Islands, but in the north the Dangerous Archipelago was entered, in
escorted by a flotilla of five and twenty boats. The king did not
coasting afterwards along New Guinea from 143 degrees to Geelwink
When they were thoroughly rested from their fatigues and cured of
molested upon his return to his own country, and to have made
Since we are speaking of the Dutch, we shall put the chronological

degrees 10 minutes, he came in sight of a mountainous country which
received the name of Assassins (Moordenaars) Bay. Tasman, who felt
found a great quantity of pigs, fowls, and fruit. On the 6th
which he may have made. From this time there is no record of the
Grijalva, Alvarado, and Inigo Ortiz de Retes, who explored the
archipelago of which this island was a part. "The inhabitants," says
to Santa Isabella, the Spaniards pursued a course which enabled them
again put to sea, and visited the islands of San Christoval, Santa
make it believed that from thence came the treasures of the Jewish
The fleet did not finally leave the Peruvian coast, where its
Mendoa_ was given to the group, in honour of the governor of Peru.
fleet, and although search was made several times, no tidings of her
biscuits made from certain roots which serve them for food.
successor in the conduct of the enterprise. After the death of
the ships rendered necessary. After passing within sight of several
number of female mourners, who are to be hired for the purpose.
emaciated and half dead with hunger. Doa Isabella landed at Manilla
solicitations, he was empowered to fit out at Lima the two vessels
the Spaniards, who, not being able to understand how a man with so
declared, even bore away the palm for grace and attractiveness from
stay of the ships here? The narrative is silent upon this subject,
prevents him from sailing round Espiritu Santo Island, assailed by
seen our latitude decrease from 2-1/2 degrees until we found
described, that portion of the Australian Coast which ends in York
contemporaries with more exact knowledge of a world until then
unhealthy archipelago, the isolated situation of which had kept away
afterwards fell ill and was nursed in the Hospital of Goa which he
a sailor chasing Barbary corsairs. Upon his return to Rome he finds
wondrous beauty, whom he marries. One would imagine that here at
travellers. He is the first of that prolific race of tourists who
passionately fond, and for which they were ready to pay fabulous
His narrative certainly contributed to give his contemporaries a
recognized nowadays as so important a help to the historian and the
XIV. Bernier could not escape from the fashion of travelling. After
colony.
displayed in the construction of gigantic edifices, quite as much as
narrative has remained to our own days the _vade-mecum_ of the
"where, without being urged to a change of religion," he could not
hospitality, but he escaped only to fall into the hands of the Turks,
personages of the state enabled him to collect numerous and
Swede in consequence of his long sojourn in Scandinavian countries.
number of plants then unknown in Europe, gave new information upon
their ability or their studies, the merit of having rendered the

nursed. Free from any prejudices, Dampier forgot his engagement when
Tortuga, off the coast of San Domingo, had sworn implacable hatred
Gulf of Mexico, while others establish themselves upon the island of
February, 1684, and as soon as he can escape from the storms which
had no clothes left, but an animals skin covered his loins." We
with the captain who had proposed it. Dampiers turn would have come
islands, and especially the Baschi group. Like the thorough
Brazil, where the ship was revictualled. Far from being able again
nose; his chest and arms were likewise striped with white. His
passage between Timor and Anamabao, in a locality in which his map
sights the Cape of Good Hope of Schouten, and the island named after
twenty-one or twenty-four miles, he discovered another island, which
Dampier is the first to pass through the strait which separates New
necessary to run the ship aground and to put the crew and cargo on
information acquired at the close of the 17th century--The measure
Gravesend in the _Hopewell_, a craft about the size of one of the
proved to our navigators that it was possible to live in these
proceed further. This was doubtless the reason which decided Hudson
obliged to make for the Fare Islands, to descend southward as low
the following year; others wished to make for Ireland. This latter
superintendent who had been imposed upon him. He had not yet left
justice only exasperated the sailors. In the early part of November,
arrangements accordingly, distributed to each his share of biscuit,
The expeditions of Hudson were followed by those of Button and of
sought for, that they gave to the cape, discovered on this spot, the
ice to enter a bay on the coast. Some Esquimaux brought them a great
shores of England, where he disembarked at Dover, on August 30th.
had not produced any important results. Nevertheless, some Frenchmen
least brilliant, in order simply to occupy ourselves with the
Chastes having died, his privilege was transferred to M. de Monts,
as the St. Lawrence. In 1610, he made a fresh incursion into the
[Illustration: Siege of a village by Champlain.]
themselves over a great part of North America. Our hunters and
himself, and he felt within himself sufficient genius and courage to
country, than he set himself, with extraordinary application, to
Lawrence, and the Sea of the Antilles. What marvellous profit would
de Conti, who asked him to take with him the Chevalier Tonti, son of
an active trade in furs, which he stored in his fort of Niagara,
where he found an encampment of Miamis, and where Tonti speedily
imagination, Cavelier de la Sale proceeds to their encampment, where
beyond the river of the Illinois, and if possible, to its source.
furs of the value of 10,000 crowns, been lost, but a vessel which
five Frenchmen who composed his garrison, and had retired as far as
navigation of 1050 miles in a mere bark. The anticipations so
of Canada, wrote to the Minister of Marine, that the discoveries of
minister had not been much influenced by the letters of M. de la
new colony. Soldiers and artisans had been very badly chosen, as was
recovered, however, and the expedition set sail again on November
patriotism. Not only was he unwilling to land all the provisions,
ignorance of the workmen. Struck with the resemblance of the
Mississippi, and in descending the river to seek help from the
qualities, he had known how to master his gloomy and atrabilious
[Illustration: Assassination of La Sale.]
themselves to work, and transported to the other side of the
resources and prosperity which they should have endeavoured to
the observation of the explorers, as they were destined to do for a
famous Cipango which had exercised so great an attraction for our

considerably increased; and this was to be the work of the next
THE ENGLISH AT THE NORTH POLE

The different-coloured omnibuses that ran along the exterior wall
usual for steamboats to have so much sail."

satisfaction, "that you dont know how to put two and two together



_Forward_ has a captain on board?"

be sure before they denied it. Besides, Cornhill himself didnt laugh.
preparations for departure were drawing to an end; there was not one
which does not always end in port; when in addition to the ordinary
of a solidity to withstand all tests; it was evident that she was
so that it might easily be turned in any direction; but neither the
who had the honour of rounding the American continent from Behrings
sails will make her go the quickest."
sorrel and _cochlearia_, all antiscorbutic, confirmed the opinion
a long mahogany whaler, a tin _pirogue_ covered with gutta-percha,
follows:--
for the above-mentioned sum. You do not know me, but that is of no
_Forwards_ crew must be composed of Englishmen without incumbrance;
take it on board and have it fed with oaten bread, mixed with tallow
CHAPTER III
He was received by the firm with all the attention due to a man with
himself, "The best thing I can do is to say nothing at all; there
the business.
the North Pole."
I guarantee beforehand you can trust me for that."

"I dont hide from you," continued Johnson, "that the cruise will
instructions as to the destination of the _Forward_. He did all he


His eyes, small as those of witty men generally are, his mouth, large
_Forward_ to command; and if he commands he will start, and if he


"To Dr. Clawbonny.
"I havent the slightest idea, and I do not care so that it is somewhere.
other countries, other nations, to study in the exercise of their
caused him transports of joy. From that day he stopped with Shandon,
determined to do anything no one could prevent him. From that time
second engineer; 10. Strong (negro), cook; 11. Foker, ice-master;
sailors were still uneasy, and Shandon, fearing that some of them
needs of a Polar expedition. The room of the third officer was placed
his herbals, his set of pigeon-holes, his instruments of precision,
To complete the description of the _Forward_ it is sufficient to say
the singular observation that when the dog was on the poop he always
If Richard Shandon did not feel the same apprehensions he was not

and youll see the impossibility."
his glass in despair.

"Now, commander," continued Johnson, "if you will allow me to advise
the rising of the sun. The next day the first distribution of letters
of the _Forward_ executed his orders in silence, looking at him all
Shandon looked round him once more and consulted his watch. The twelve


Soon the _Forward_ had passed the docks, and directed by a Liverpool

on board went on with regularity.
if Im not a bad judge the _Forward_ behaves herself well."
after having vainly repaired it bit by bit, finished by taking it

at least. Besides, you know what I think about it."
at sea? On the coast of Greenland the service of the post must leave

European ground that these bold sailors were to perceive, and more
its owner.
to kill another in my life."
During the late storm Richard Shandon had been able to judge of the
resolute; they easily grumbled. Gripper wanted to break his
Newfoundland, inclines to the north-east along the coast of Norway.
the 14th to the 16th of April the swell was great, but on the Monday
Just then the ice-master, who was keeping watch on the crossbars of
in perfect ice-fields, in the forty-fourth degree of north latitude,
"Well, I declare you astonish me!" cried Shandon.
"Yes, commander," answered Johnson; "we are making very little way,
CHAPTER VI
make no mistake about this phenomenon, and declared, from its
the movements of the swell. The next day the man at the masthead
"There," said the doctor, "that is what gives very singular reason
seas."


a hot-country species."
made prisoner by the _Forward_ to the great joy of Dr. Clawbonny,
the coast offered many dangers at an epoch in which icebergs were
an instant a line of peaks, ridged with large blocks of ice; but the
At last, under a temperature which at noon was only 12 degrees, under
discovered Greenland. Sebastian Cabot forced his way as far as
Munk, and in 1719 by Knight, Barlow, Vaughan, and Scroggs, of whom
In 1826 Beechey touched Chamisso Island; James Ross wintered from
Polar continents, with such indented coast lines. The most daring

of a cask, in which the ice-master was partly hidden to protect him
whilst Shandon was snatching a few hours sleep in his cabin.
years ago."
not unhappy. I say unhappy, but the word does not translate my thought,
of Davis, Baffin, Hudson, Ross, Parry, Franklin, and Bellot, if I
"Yes, a little; but since we got into the Straits they have begun
them being able to come back. Now if he had been on board when we
"Excepting me," ventured the doctor.
a continued surface of ice the limits of which cannot be perceived."
should call it a calf. It was very necessary to give names to all
of Parliament."
acknowledge that such a manner of voyaging required months, whilst
"Yes, we must get there, Mr. Clawbonny. In June and July we should
the deck by means of levers, which opened, stopped, and reversed them
play the snow whipped by the hurricane. This animation of the winged
crew gave chase to sea-birds, of which they caught a great number.
the machines became very fatiguing. The steam was turned off quickly

However, the _Forward_ managed, by cunningly slipping into narrow
comfortable to be between a glass of gin and a bottle of porter. Cant
us getting the scurvy. Its the only way to make us go far."
"His nose is too red for that," answered Bolton. "Pen neednt grumble
"What do you mean, Warren?" asked Garry, looking fixedly at him.

on these ice-banks theres no more a captain than there is a public?
cabin, and no one will know how he got there."


of authority, looking up at the sails as if he were on watch?"
night when he goes away two or three miles from the vessel, howling

of the Admiralty!"
"Enough talking, my boys," called out Mr. Johnson, interfering just
eight degrees below zero. The doctor was tempted to stay quietly in
had got beyond the sixty-sixth parallel, and the fathom line declared
starboard; each one, armed with a long perch with an iron point, drove
machine.
a moment of undefinable anguish; the men forsook their poles and
often. When those floating bodies are disengaged from each other by

The day would not have been remarkable if the following fact, however
Shandon could not believe his own eyes, and before reading such a
yourself have shown on the late occasions, and begs you to give
"Is that all?" cried the doctor.
"And whats that?" asked Shandon quickly.
years in Liverpool; doctor, your supposition is inadmissible."
"That is evident," exclaimed Johnson.

_Forward_ is not to seek a North-West passage, as we shall leave to
"After all," resumed James Wall, "to come back to the captain, if
supernatural side of it is increased it may produce very serious

but read--he begs you to give evidence of his gratitude to the crew."
him. "I told you the animal could write," he used to say to the sailors.
its offspring, and consequently the doctor was compelled to renounce
The coincidence of these two facts were noted by the doctor; that
that the doctor saw for the first time the sun graze the horizon
brig, after having headed Womans Island, came in sight of Uppernawik,
acquaintance with them; besides, Foker, who was interpreter of the
for which reason he did not fail to address them by the title of
in Copenhagen, a bearskin forty Danish dollars, a blue foxskin four,
these emanations, _sui generis_.
probably, had settled in those countries? To what epoch could he trace
The small boat came back to the brig towards evening, bringing back
settlement, and the hideous stakes to which were hung seal-guts and
not take the arrival of these new comrades too much to heart, and
were accumulating to the north of Baffins Sea. The land offered a
water in front of the _Forwards_ prow became imminent, and if she
was powerless, and it was necessary to force a road through the
suffering and moral uneasiness, all contributed to discourage the
first engineer, who up to now had remained a slave to his duty.
as glass.


investigations made by navigators, it may probably be so for a long
"I? Commander, I should go on; Im of the same opinion as Mr.

"Ill tell you what," said Pen, "Ive had enough of it, and if in
if next Sunday morning the road aint clear, well back out south."
up."

"But if the officers refuse to follow us?" replied Pen, who wished

"Hes the cause of everything," said the assembly, getting excited.

"Hurrah for Pen!" cried Plover.
in spite of the dogs energetic efforts, he was unmercifully
days obedience. During a part of the night and the following day
miles, but this was not enough. Shandon, overwhelmed with fear, and
position. The icebergs became more numerous, and drifted by in the
unremitting uneasiness; the doctor was putting his voyage notes in
"Mr. Wall! Mr. Wall!"

"They call that a mirage?" said Clifton. "Well, you may believe me
we can only get a few miles ahead, we shall probably get to the end
as if the devil was at their heels."
"Its a bear!" said one.

none the less produced upon the minds of the sailors, who were very
ice-mountains and the icebergs. Johnson was at the wheel. Shandon,
"I can scarcely believe my eyes," answered Gripper.
"Ay! ay!" answered all the sailors.
above the gulf. It was at this instant that Bolton addressed his speech

the iceberg. The former, in order to get through, was running south;
adhered to its neighbours and closed up all issue.
overcome; when he wished to command, he stammered and hesitated. His
that man was Garry, the sailor.
whiskers which had covered his face, which made it look more energetic
voice pronounced the following words:
them. Besides, my name is enough. It means energy and patriotism.
Who, then, was this Hatteras, and for what reason did his name make
for anything. When you saw him you felt he was daring; when you heard
discoveries, and were, in fact, rather behind other nations in that
that Englishmen were excluded from the glorious list of navigators
Cook in 1774 to obtain New Caledonia and the Sandwich Isles, where
Inglefield, Belcher, Austin, Kellett, Moore, McClure, Kennedy, and
atrocious torments, and John Hatteras pushed his adventurous
who was brought back to his own country by a Danish whaler after a
the heart of Hatteras it changed to hatred; he was resolved to outdo
John Hatteras had made himself known. His dog, the faithful Dick,
from love of money or daring; others submitted because they could

lot."
"I could not have secured officers more distinguished for courage
founded. In 1817 the _Neptune_ got up to the north of Spitzbergen,
_Isabel_, and the _Advance_ ascertained that proceeding from the

there are two cold Poles; one is situated in Asia at 79 degrees 30

"Do you hear that, Shandon?" said Hatteras; "cant Englishmen do as
this is what I propose."
there well drive forward towards the Pole. What do you think about

blasting cylinders, which would have had no effect on such masses
Hatterass order he was again at his post. The crew remained on deck,


"Aim at the pass!" cried the captain to the gunsmith. The latter obeyed,
pass; it was time, for scarcely had the _Forward_ cleared the opening
On Wednesday, the 23rd of May, the _Forward_ had again taken up her
did not take the trouble to wait for them. The Byam-Martin peaks,
little explored by navigators, who are generally in a hurry to sail
_Forward_ was then at the extremity of Lancaster Strait.

that in the other hemisphere quietly terminates in tapered-out points
"Yes, we are quite exposed to the north wind, and it is turning us
have been deposited on that island in order to provide for future
numerous. It was not until 1848 that we began to be uneasy about the
following spring he began to search the coasts of North Somerset on
"Well, to finish all I know about James Ross: he tried to reach
_Assistance_ and the _Resolute_, explored Wellington Channel; John

Belcher, with Captain Kellett under him; Sir Edward visited

"By that time," continued the doctor, "Belchers fleet began to come
Island on the 11th of August, 1858, wintered a second time in Bellots


recognisable by a slight swelling of the ground; they had been
saved by Lieutenant Bellot, who braved the October temperature in
blue bellies, the top of the head blue, and the remainder of the
bones of animals, and traces of Esquimaux habitations could be still
by an unexpected displacement of ice-fields, a very frequent
The width of Prince Regents Channel is about the same from Port
smoke from which twisted round the shining points of the icebergs;
surrounded could be clearly distinguished.
Hatteras knew to his sorrow.
damaged by the ice on her second wintering, that her crew were obliged
and, if I remember rightly, the roof of his tent was a topsail."
Creswell Bay; from Fury Point the coast rose towards the north in
expedition in 1828; his maps indicated an uninterrupted coast-line,

experienced eye alone could distinguish an opening between them.
last."
Bellot Strait is seventeen miles long and a mile wide, and about six
Hatteras, Johnson, and Shandon remained on the poop in spite of the
fell a perfect hail of ice torn off from the surface of the icebergs
the brig got under way, and glided slowly amongst the ice-streams,
in the atmosphere; the rays of the sun that fall on the prisms are
"We are in for it," began Hatteras; "it is impossible to go any

repulsion acted upon the different parts of it; we may find the sea

a pecuniary reward, but I am not seconded by my officers, but they
sudden change during the evening; under some influence of the wind,
During thirty-six hours the _Forward_ followed the windings of

limestone heap raised by Ross; he ran to it; an opening allowed him
rapping the earth.
in this very spot!"

The crew there experienced a strong and painful sensation, and many
whole crew. He saw how powerful a recital would be in such a situation,
you may read those of these unfortunate men, not one of whom was
of Franklins sailors were buried there, and by a document which was
intention was to get back to the American coast; but tempests stopped

is Le Vesconte Point. There is Erebus Bay, where the boat made out
continent and five on a neighbouring island, some half-buried, some
produced an indescribable effect. The crew, excited by its emotion
appeared entirely free; the _Forward_ made up for lost time; she fled
obedience. There was little fatiguing work to do, and they had a good
"It seems to me," said James Wall one day to Richard Shandon, "that

of coal at Beechey Island. It appears there is a large provision
as much interest in setting yourself against the captains imprudence
"Of course he did, and for the present he can do what he likes with
command to a less adventurous captain."
"Dont tell the crew what I think," answered Shandon quickly; "the
afford it. The thoughts of the money inflamed the minds of the crew,

his riches, and he had better wait till he could roll under a Liverpool
steam on, followed the wide passes where it was easy to work her.
blocks of ice balanced themselves; these blocks were of all sizes
and watched; but whilst watching he was witness to an odd phenomenon,
against one another in every direction. There were several hundreds
green water is full of them. Scoresby has made several experiments


"Oh, we could find her again easily enough if necessary!" said Simpson,
rose and fell, showing its black back like a rock in open sea. Whales
boat along, steered cleverly by Johnson.

an axe in his hand, and cut the cord. He was just in time; the two
through, as if with a lance, by pointed icicles a hundred feet long,
On the 25th of June the _Forward_ arrived in sight of Cape Dundas
southward, and although he had taken the precaution of leaving England
is defended by enormous icebergs which the north winds pile up there
navigators. Almost all ships that adventure in these seas stop there.

us to revictual a whole expedition."
"Are we getting near?" said Hatteras, who, telescope in hand, was


The tablet bore the following inscription:
chief of the expedition the most devoted and most affectionate of
in the track of the _Erebus_ and the _Terror_. Hatteras was the first
"I dont know--I dont see----" stammered Johnson.

from here, and if they are not, they----"
the men sent by Lieutenant Wall came up; they soon saw the state of

eat, dovekies with black bodies, wings spotted with white, feet and

Hatteras to get into Wellington Channel, and worked away with a will.

little progress northward, for contrary winds often forced them to
for three weeks they did not even change their clothes. They floated
It was upon this very North Devon coast! It was to be, I suppose,
Beechey Island!"
sledge and an indiarubber boat. He took the boatswain of the _North
out to his companions to drop the cord, and we were dragged to a great
the morning of Thursday, August 18th. Then Mr. Bellot tied up his
Captain Pullens instructions that he tried to get to land. He was
the fatal coast, and Johnson lost sight of the place of the painful

the brig along. Hatteras, not considering the mens fatigue, resolved
him; they were devoted to him body and soul; amongst the undecided
he had undertaken the voyage in order to reach, without having caught
At this unexpected command, the surprise was great on board the
at Wall. The stupefied engineers hesitated to go down to the
"I say," answered Pen with an oath--"I say, weve had enough of it,


the eye, tired with the eternal white of the snow.
pierce the tenacious fog. Birds were still very numerous, and their
"Wasnt I right to say the pretended discovery was purely imagination?
the 15th of August Mount Percy raised its peak, covered with eternal


"Yes, Johnson," answered the doctor, shaking hands with the brave
day in Northumberland Bay. She was hemmed in on all sides.
_Pioneer_ and the _Assistance_. It was thence that he organised his
shall find it! I shall see it."
the place of coal," answered Shandon. "I have heard say you can turn

were obliged to think about wintering. The sailors talked together
you."
"He and his dog," answered Clifton.
"You never mind, Gripper," answered Pen; "well have a captain and

wind, even a contrary one, was welcome, for in a calm the sea froze



the blocks of ice which it caught in its passage; Hatteras gave orders
the last gleams of light. Hatterass orders were heard in the midst
ice-blocks; then she rolled over till her planks cracked again. After

Cornwall, was sighted on the 10th of September, but soon disappeared;
PREPARATIONS FOR WINTERING
Hatteras found himself at the Frozen Pole beyond the countries seen
rocks, verdure instead of snow, and the sea in its liquid state again,
to him desirable. The crew were set to work at the sails, which were
sailors by his happy disposition. He instructed himself and others,
to pay us a visit; when the work is done it will answer, I can tell
it.
The _Forward_ had been built expressly for these regions, and the
Canvas hose let in the air necessary to make the stoves draw; other
floors of the two rooms were rubbed with warm sand every morning;
received their lessons from nature, and are our teachers here;
being carefully clothed in wool from head to foot, the men wore hoods
was pretty calm, and the cold without breeze was bearable. Hatteras
white plains from the whiteness of their fur; when the intense cold
managed to catch one at about a hundred yards from the ship; he had
on the 23rd of September--winter may be said to begin in the Arctic
they set several fox-traps, but the suspicious animals did not let
to stir out. In a single day the temperature varied fifteen and twenty

the field; their footsteps left marks on the snow, and the moon lighted

to me they want civilising."
"Not for long, Mr. Clawbonny," answered Johnson. "Theyll soon desert

but the animal did not seem to be touched. Johnson advanced in his
"Only three shots," added Bell in a tone of disdain, "and hes down."
Johnson did not know what to say.
"What is it?" asked the doctor.
"There isnt a doubt about it, and Im sorry weve shot the poor animal.
astonishment of the doctor; it was a very rain of shooting stars;

some long excursion.
the men stood near the fire in a compact group. The doctor advised
impressions? His men were profoundly astonished at seeing him facing
constituted so, and I should not be surprised if being by his side
crowns of a heavenly richness. At last the bows joined, the splendid
On the 26th of November there was a high tide, and the water escaped
All sorts of vessels were useless, and the liquid they contained would
the stove or lying under the blankets of their hammocks. Their health
lose sight of their sufferings; they were obliged to stay there, and
him that he was dressed like a seal or a whale, who, thanks to its
the brig. It was in the midst of these unutterable tortures that the


last more than a week with the strictest economy.
resolute, and Pen with anger in his eyes, and two or three of their
"What then?" answered Hatteras.
it where we can!"
ground, its sharp edge sinking into the flooring. Johnson, Bell, and

and scurvy kept the greater number on board; besides, neither fishing
the deck for hours. He was guarding his treasures; the wood of the
"We must," said the doctor gently.

"They could not have found coal on this deserted coast," said
Johnson was immediately told of their resolution, of which he strongly
from Hatterass breath; he burnt his eyelashes more than once by
hundred miles at least from your store of coal!"
had known that they had been dragged farther north they would very
there was no reason for doubting his veracity--they should find things
cords; the form thus given to it gave it increased resistance to
for each man and each dog; there were seven dogs including Dick, and
had ceased to drift; he was obliged to be certain in order to get
to overlook Shandon and the others. They are kept prisoners here by

The provisions had been calculated in consequence. During the first
orders about the sick; Bell and Simpson shook hands silently with

three miles an hour. The surface of the ice was unequal, and the sledge
immediately between ones lips, and the breath is not warm enough
pemmican and boiling tea; the latter beverage comforted the cold
mackintosh was spread over the floor and kept them from the damp.
with mounds or cairns something like the Esquimaux hiding-places.
captains place is on board."
"Doctor!" called the captain.

singularly bright; from the top of the iceberg the view stretched
hidden below the horizon, gave six hours of a sort of twilight, not
in a complete state of congelation, reaching a height of about ninety
minutes he said:
outline was more distinctly seen. "Why, its a bear!" thought the
"Doctor!"
"The sledge!" cried the captain.

"Wait a minute, Hatteras; I believe the fog is clearing off," called
had attacked the sledge, and were making havoc with the provisions.

"The devils have done for us!" said Bell.
their journey they would be obliged to put themselves on half-rations.
fatigue, and the dogs drew with difficulty. Their insufficient food
interior of the land and climb the high cliffs on the coast, across
things may be readily imagined; during the night the thermometer went
of the sledge was broken by an unexpected shock, and they were forced
"Why," answered Bell, "if youve got a nose left, you owe it to me."


his tone, and he answered Simpsons complaints by incessant attention.
on the ground; he was considering what had better be done, when a
shoulders.

about the _Porpoise_, but I do know that the _Forward_ is waiting
if so, what was it doing so near the Pole?"
doctor and Bell took it in turns to cover their eyes or to guide the
lie down on the ground, and the temperature was so low that they were
the snow-house, when a lamentable groan from Simpson drew his
"The roof is falling in!" cried the doctor.
"A gun!" cried the doctor.
On the 27th they found a sextant half-buried in the snow, then a
heart was hardened by his own suffering, and he did not answer.
succeeded in getting up the tent again, which, though it did not
"Dead!" repeated Bell.
round him.


it had now only two hundred pounds weight to carry. They mended their
especially as they intended starting early the next morning. Bell
began scratching at the ice.

"These are not buried bodies," cried the doctor, "the poor fellows
a man of forty, who had not the cadaverous look of the others. The
the snow-house, and had searched about carefully. He came up holding
to his attentions, the doctor succeeded in recalling the unfortunate
offered himself in their place. He pulled with energy.
about 300 paces in front, and a column of black smoke went up to the
"My ship! My ship!" cried he.


ASTRONOMERS AND CARTOGRAPHERS.
Although Galileo had observed the eclipses of Jupiters satellites as

and induced them to consider the earth an elliptical figure, elongated
At the same time Louis XIV., urged by Colbert, gave orders for the
The result of the earlier observations of Cassini and La Hire was to
of "five hundred" miles of distance between Marseilles and Alexandria.
Strait of Sunda, when in reality they were more than sixty leagues
published by Sanson in 1679, makes the modification apparent.
carried out his project at the age of twenty-five. His brother, Joseph
Peter the Great, on his way to Paris, paid a tribute to his merit by
"It is difficult," says M. E. Desjardins, in his "Geographie de la
English Channel, by using contour levels to represent the variations

Maupertuis.
times as there are intermediate degrees."
rather than join your expedition."
inhabitants of the town were dead. At every step one meets mutilated
instead of one, and thereby also to diminish the chance of mistakes,
Voltaire somewhat maliciously said of it,--
    En allant au cercle polaire.
Odonais, a clock-maker, and a draughtsman. They started from La
crossing. This route had been previously taken by Alvarado, when
carrying their implements to the summit of the mountains, and that
shadow; we distinguished the arms, the legs, the head, but we were
observation of the two first, but always observed all three.
important voyage, to which we shall have occasion to refer later.
privateers of Bristol determined to fit out ships to attack the
slightest errors, and the most insignificant oversights could be
of the exactitude of the observations made by Rogers. Navigators have
it almost unawares.
attracted notice had been lighted by him.
two huts of willow, which he covered with a sort of rush, and lined
twenty-four hours, he with the utmost difficulty succeeded in crawling

This part of his voyage concerns us but little, and a few particulars
breast, and each time I inflicted such a wound that he fled howling
hitherto met with in the Pacific Ocean Seas. They had long black hair
latter place, and at the Cape of Good Hope, Rogers cast anchor in the
The merit of them, however, if we are to believe Nichols Literary

sailors to vow that all they had hitherto known of tempests were
The _Centurion_ had the greatest need of rest. She had lost eighty of
It produces water-cresses, purslain, sorrels, turnips, and Sicilian
At the beginning of December, the crews were sufficiently recovered
them were seen floating asleep upon the surface of the ocean, a good
all but foundered, and her crew being too reduced to work her, was
men, worn out by privation and illness, the only survivors of the 2000
cattle may be seen grazing together in a vast meadow, and the sight is

and endless resources, soon roused his companions from their despair!
careful not to offend them."

[Illustration: Fight between the _Centurion_ and a Spanish galleon.
and reached Spithead on the 15th of June, 1744, after an absence of

Britain--Arrival in Batavia--Byron--Stay at Rio Janeiro and Port
the fulfilment of his promise. It was only after several voyages in
that Roggewein was ignorant of the voyages and discoveries of his
island St. Louis, belonging to the French, apparently quite unaware
he had been separated since the 21st of December.
sergeant-major." After describing the Banana, of which the leaves are
in every direction,--soon, however, to return in greater haste.
west-north-west. He traversed the sea called Mauvaise by Schouten, and
recognize in Roggeweins description of the Pernicious Islands, the
which were half submerged.
are situated twenty-five leagues westward of the Pernicious Islands.
Once more the Dutch needlessly shed the blood of an inoffensive
strong enough for the treachery and disloyalty of their adversaries.
during the favourable season?
to the heels. Hats of the same material protected their heads and
Roggewein Islands; after having caught sight of Tienhoven and
restore all that it had appropriated, and to pay heavy damages.
Cape of Good Hope and the Straits of Magellan, which have been
selected. From his earliest years, he had shown an enthusiastic love
returned at once to service, and distinguished himself in various
Upon the 3rd of July, anchor was finally weighed, and ten days later,


supposed, but to prosecute discoveries, which might prove of great
think that he should experience great difficulty in avoiding the east
the same appearance. The mountains looked blue, as is often the case
The next morning a terrible gale of wind arose, heralded by the
The English sailors landed and upon advancing into the interior, met
that he had seen it, declared it was about 47 degrees latitude, S.,
to land. Curious to see these Patagonians, about whom preceding
With them were numbers of dogs and of very small horses, excessively


resumed his search for the Falkland Islands. Seven days later, he
"I did not expect," says Byron, "that it would be possible to find so
themselves. It would be no easy task to guess how they came here,
Byron took possession of Port Egmont and the adjacent isles, called
After having named a number of rocks, islets, and capes, Byron left
colony in the Falkland Islands.
only could have relished their food. It consisted of large pieces of

profit by this season one should enter them in the month of December.
surf broke over the shore, and prevented the shore-boats from reaching
seeking Davis Land, now known as Easter Island, which was placed by
Large bushy trees, shrubs and groves were seen, and a number of
had reason for supposing that limes, bananas, and other tropical
simple deposit, which was not yet, but which in time would become, an
Next day, the sailors and such of the sick as could leave their
On the 21st again a new chain of islands surrounded by breakers was
had been forced to drink, were almost all attacked by dysentery.
was scarce and wild, the water detestable, the roadstead was never
decomposition took place. Lastly, the fish caught upon this shore was
Fortunately fish was abundant, as it would have been impossible to

After forty-eight days navigation, Byron perceived the coast of
when we saw the sea tinged with blood to a great distance. We
voyage had been attempted. If it was less fruitful of results than had
II.
her naval reputation to such a height.
too hasty. The _Dauphin_ only anchored in the Downs at the beginning
by Philip Carteret. Both were most distinguished officers who had just
precaution which his experience dictated to him.
Equator, the _Prince Frederick_ gave signs of distress, and it was
satisfaction the knives, scissors, and other trifles which it was
"Each one," continues the narrative, "carried a strange kind of weapon,
conversed animatedly among themselves. Their attention was attracted
the course of about a fortnight these remedies completely restored the
_Swallow_. The former taking sufficient for a year, the latter for ten
her speed, and follow her movements, for it is most important that in
Before we follow Wallis on his voyage across the Pacific, we will give
seal-skin reaching to the knees. Their weapons were javelins tipped
months we had been in constant danger of shipwreck, where in the
Upon the 6th of June, two islands were discovered amidst general
of another island, but the natives appeared so ill-disposed and the

and sharpened stones shaped like axes, scissors, and awls. They also
the black, set a seal to the convictions of numbers.
that other and perhaps larger islands would be found at no great
an example quickly followed by the others. It recalled the incident of

immediately surrounded them with pirogues, bringing pigs, fowls, and
the wind, when all at once Wallis perceived a bay seven or eight miles
easily repaired as forgotten.
contest.
After prostrating themselves, and offering various marks of repentance,
left in exchange hatchets and toys which were carried off to the
[Illustration: Polynesia. Grav par E. Morieu.]
to persons habituated to command, that she was of high station. He
assemblage remained perfectly still for some moments, in the silence
take the trouble to open her mouth.
be heated. They discovered it one day when the queen dined on board.
took, of allowing no one to leave the vessel without being searched,
slopes the huts of the natives stood out clearly, and in the valleys
for a long time, with so much grief that it was impossible to comfort
Tall, well built, active, slightly dark in complexion, the natives
Civilization has little advanced. We have already stated that the
found its way to his ear.
Hope?
time, she encountered a succession of frightful storms, which tore the

reliable information of the countries he visited. Had he only been
condition of his consort.
The weather continued wretched. Upon the evening of the 27th a sudden
upon the shore, and at perceiving a battery of four pieces on the
Carteret, who, owing to unfavourable winds, had had several
them. In re-reading the description given by Waser, Davis surgeon, he
latitude, and 40 degrees west of my point of departure, and as far as
and to the thick fog, which hid the sun for several days, that
after the first discoverer. In these latitudes, the sailors,
the land discovered, but this place, which is called by the natives
Hope, and to return eastward after touching at the Falkland Islands,
limits of this portion of the ocean, in which the Solomon Islands are
criminal, who at the last moment on the scaffold receives a reprieve!
presents. He was expressly enjoined not to expose himself to danger,
pirogues advanced towards his sloop, and he was unable to rejoin it
directed upon the woods as well as volleys of musketry from the sloop.
at all costs, and this was utterly impossible in this spot. Carteret

named Gower, where cocoa-nuts were procurable. Next day he encountered
boiled it in the broth made from our cakes, and this broth, afterwards

He soon penetrated to a gulf to which Dampier had given the name of St.
to be perfectly dressed. They powder their hair or rather the wool on

He afterwards reconnoitred Durour and Matty Islands and the Cuedes,
On the 29th October, the English reached the north-eastern portion of
The latter, hoping to find the English crew asleep, attacked the
Straits of Magellan.
All Carterets representations, his remarks upon the inhumanity of the
They were kept under guard, and could not communicate with the natives.
The ground is even and beautiful in appearance. There are many
make Carteret give them a testimonial as to the treatment he had met


was organized for the purpose of prosecuting new discoveries in the
profession, he devoted himself to the sciences, and published a
with the rank of captain of Dragoons, to rejoin Montcalm in Canada.

the emigrants from Canada who had settled in France to escape the
gratification upon an appointment which no past event justified. But
which appeared to him wholly suited to his purpose, but he was not
squadron, followed it to Port Famine.

In the early days of November, 1766, Bougainville repaired to Nantes,
changed his artillery for less heavy pieces, but in spite of these

celebrated by processions and fireworks. Religious ceremonies supply

"They are of medium height, very ugly, and almost all infected with
vast and uncultivated country where it was difficult even to meet with
and everything necessary for the boats. But fruits, such as figs,
morrow by the two Spanish vessels, which had been much tried by the
Bougainville decided at last, on the 2nd of June, to reach Rio Janeiro,
abb in ecclesiastical dress.
emporium.
another, and the Provedor de hacienda reale the third. This casket
damages and the shock increased the leak of the ship, and forced her

one and a half leagues in width, and four in length. In this part of
passage of the ships, even if they do not force them to seek shelter
repainted, Port Beau Bassin, Cormadire Bay, off the coast of Tierra
It was visited by a band of Pecheians, the inhabitants of Tierra del

about twelve years of age came on board, and glass beads and bits of
shore. The anchor which was then heaved, gave way, and without the
we met with in the passage of the Straits of Magellan" (and in this
time, and the route which he lauds so highly has been almost abandoned

[Illustration: Lancers Island.]
to which he gave the name of La Boudeuse. It was Matea Island,
covered with wood. We could scarcely credit our sight, when we

surrounded by a vast crowd, who entirely undressed him to investigate
"We accepted it," says Bougainville, "and the man at once bent towards
almost unconsciously. None the less, his descriptions should be
study for the scientific man, and the basis of works for the
which consisted of thirty men. The shed was closed on all sides and
The captain, however, knew that the harbour was not well-sheltered,
these rigorous measures the natives calmed down, and the night passed
named Aotourou, asked, and finally obtained, permission to accompany
The principal productions were cocoas, bananas, bread fruits, yams,
they easily attain, the sharpness of all their senses, and the
decomposition, the women go every day to weep near the monuments, and
were clever and industrious. Their pirogues were constructed after a
month of April the weather was fine, with little wind.
blue; they wore no beards; their hair was drawn into tufts on the top
these lands form an extended chain in the same parallel. The islands
in their hands. Those who possessed none, held large stones, all ready
as they fled to the woods. It was a regular massacre. The captain,
It would appear that the navigator aimed at making many discoveries,
New Hebrides has been given in preference. "I readily believed," he
follow the same parallel for over 350 leagues. I resolved upon doing
the supposition, when on arriving at Tahiti suspicions were changed
[Illustration: Mdlle. Barrs adventure.]
breakers, trunks of trees in large quantities, fruits and sea wrack,
the Gulf of the Louisiade, which had received the name of Cul-de-sac


Several pirogues speedily surrounded the two ships. They were manned
armed with bucklers, lances, and bows, were embarked, advanced against
the southern extremity of which, called Laverdy Cape, appears to join
at the very point where Carteret had stopped.
Again this part and its neighbourhood to a great distance were
plate upon which was an inscription in English. It was easy to guess
of bivalve mussel, was stung by a serpent. The fearful suffering and
ornament of kingly palaces, attracted numberless visitors, who could
notice of the _Etoile_ and _Boudeuse_, disdaining to enter into
last at the extreme north of New Guinea, were passed in succession.
unfit for duty.
surrounded it, caused pleasure in which I participated, but which I
his orders except under paramount necessity.
suited the Dutch to affirm. As for trusting to French charts, they
Carteret, Bougainville entered St. Malo on the 16th of February, 1769,
raised to the rank of senator, created a count by Napoleon I.,
plebeian rank, excluded him from reward. He was afterwards given the
I.
these reasons we shall dwell a little upon the humble beginning of the
consent, James soon left the linendrapers, to engage himself as
Intelligent, active, thoroughly at home in all the details of the
acknowledged to be so exact and complete that he received orders to
London, upon an eclipse of the sun, which he had observed in
The command was offered to the famous hydrographer A. Dalrymple,
qualifications, rarely to be met with in a sailor. For, although the

into port at Funchal, in the island of Madeira, on the 13th of
scientific aspect of the expedition. However, he could not well refuse
Cook entered the Straits of Lemaire on the 14th of January, 1769.
their deliverance, with a joy which can only be estimated by those who
only exist with difficulty. In spite of these facts, of all the

Port Royal by Wallis, and where that captain had had a struggle with

A very painful incident, the consequences of which might have been
This proceeding effaced the recollection of the painful antecedents,
unfavourable weather, but on the 3rd of June, the sun rose in all its
the star, was formed; the same phenomenon occurred upon the second
observation, some of the crew, forcing an entrance into the storeroom,
In one of these excursions, Sir Joseph Banks met a band of itinerant
of information as to the manners and customs of the natives.
find out. Cook could only ascertain that the cemeteries called Morai,
minister to Queen Oberea, he was afterwards one of the principal

wish to exchange names with Cook. During the entire stay in port, he
the _Endeavour_ from remaining. She set sail for the south.
Nearer approach showed it to be of great extent. Unanimous opinion
equally ingenious surmises, which were all proved false, when later it
They had proceeded only a short distance from the boat, when four men,
whence they soon heard the natives returning to the shore, eagerly
would pay for all that was brought them with iron, of which he
too unfortunately for Cook to persevere in them any longer. He
sensible people will blame me for having fired upon these unfortunate
remembered that in such a situation, the command to fire having once
to procure but one thing--wood. Poverty Bay, in 38 degrees 42 minutes



with impunity, a robber who had taken a piece of cloth was fired upon
similar struggles with the natives, with descriptions of natural
returned to the charge, evidently determined to fight the navigators,
and it surprised Cook and the other English.
in fault, did not fail to exhibit a severity worthy of Lycurgus,
On the 16th of January, 1770, after naming various portions of the
inquire if they had ever seen a vessel like the _Endeavour_. But he
considered them as trophies, and testimonies to their bravery.
Cook visited a pah in the neighbourhood. Built upon a little island or
"It is surprising," as Cook remarks, "that the industry and care
outside Cape Koamaroo. Sharply pointed rocks rose from the sea. The
was, however, as yet only partially known, there still remained some
to keep four or five leagues from the shore.


inclines vertically to the sea, and is covered with dark forests. The
and to this end to steer westward to the eastern shores of New Holland.
named it Staten Island. To Cook belongs the credit of determining its
engraving.)]
extraordinary strength. Their nets, of an enormous size, are composed
Kennedy, in his very curious work on New Zealand, tells us that in
[Illustration: A New Zealand family.]
Leaving Haouaikai, which must be identical with Hawai, of the Sandwich
anthropology, but they were scarcely suspected in the time of Cook,
of the powers of their adversaries, once convinced that the new comers
They were in the habit of tatooing themselves, and some of their tatoo
attached to her ear. She was allowed to take it, and then the key was
Their coverings were sometimes trimmed in a most elegant manner, by
"The usual cause of illnesses," remarks Cook, "being intemperance and
dangers of navigation--Crossing Torres Straits--The natives of New
This part of Australia is mountainous, and covered with various kinds
thighs and legs they had circles of the same kind, which would have
where they found several spears. In the same bay, they landed some


channel narrow and very shallow.

eastwards, and it was conceivable that the lake had a second outlet
They were in 16 degrees S. Lat. and 214 degrees 39 minutes W. Long.

the vessel.

all the officers and crew worked the capstan, and as the vessel was
stoppage of the leak. From this time the men, who spoke of driving the
several others were seen, who jumped upon their fore feet, and took
portions of their bodies were painted red, and one of them had white

upon one line of rocks more violently than upon the others; this
The situation appeared desperate, and Cook decided to steer as far as
Had they not just escaped so terrible a danger, the English would have
strongly returned, and the _Endeavour_ was once more carried within
because it was accomplished in unknown seas, in the midst of breakers
On the 21st he doubled the most northerly cape of New Holland, to
steered for the southern coast of New Guinea, which he followed until
to regain their ship, from whence they could examine them at their
that our ship was so close that in such a case we must have heard the
In passing Arrow and Wesel Islands he rectified their positions, and
The _Endeavour_ set sail on the 27th of December, and on the 15th of
been called."

occupied with still more important matters, he placed them in the
those advantages which its discovery would entail.
by the same ship-builder as the _Endeavour_. The larger was of 462


ascertain whether it was part of the continent or an island. Should it

convinced that his supply of water would not hold out until he reached
had a fire lighted in order to smoke it, and dry it quickly, and not
During this stay in port, which was longer than they expected, Forster
were forced to resume the search for Circumcision Cape. Another
about 2000 feet, and from the dimensions just given its entire bulk
horizon, prevented the two vessels from proceeding southwards, and it
losing all hope when the sound of a distant bell fell upon their ears.
physicists.
He had scarcely put this resolve into execution when the wind became
large continent.
to conclude, that if there really were land in these latitudes it
watch," says the narrative, "noticed that from time to time rays left
than three thousand six hundred and sixty leagues, without one sight
in his hand, and addressed an harangue or invocation in modulated
all the New Zealanders put together, he no doubt hastened to stow away
water-spouts, one of them sixty feet wide at its base, were visible a
to open relations with the natives, who had furnished him with
"They laid hands on all they saw, but they gave up anything so soon as

the Sound had been chased out, or had gone elsewhere of their free
scourge, owing to the precautions from which Cook never departed for a
Bougainville.
to embark as many provisions as possible before reaching Matavai.
equal the tranquillity of the interior flow of the harbour. The
The vessels were half a league from a reef, when the wind fell. In
Next day, the two vessels anchored in the roadstead of Otaiti-Piha,
"One of the officers, standing on the quarter-deck," says the
assailants determined to retreat. These hostilities led to no result,
piece of wood, were thrashing the fibrous bark of mulberry-trees to


precious to him, and which excited most cries of admiration from his
religious subjects, and asked the English if they had a god, Waheatua
The abundant fresh provisions soon restored the health of all on board

Many presents were distributed to those of his cortge who appeared
which the natives went into ecstasies over the usefulness of chairs.
fathers to him.

The same day another incident occurred. Sparrman had imprudently
not revenge it upon the innocent, and carried his complaint straight
navigators, we remarked the most humane and delicate sentiments among
Captain Furneaux had agreed to take a young man named Omai on board.
had enchanted him, and would not return on board. He was replaced by a
of a few trifles.
The method of preparing the liquor had quenched the thirst of his
border the shore. The natives were friendly, and brought stuffs, mats,
were Eatuas, or gods. I do not know if he understood me, but he
was about to leave him, when a native made me understand that it was
Cook not having been able to obtain fresh water, was obliged to leave
simple, consisting of one piece of stuff, rolled round the waist, and
following day reconnoitred Pylstart Island, discovered by Tasman. On
eaten, and some natives seeing it, wished very much for a piece, Cook


the navigators were struck with astonishment, as the Dutch had been,
"The action of the sun on their heads," says the narrative, "has
consisted of two or three kinds of rugose grass, which grew on the
now correct this mistake, which has been repeated in all subsequent
of a race long disappeared, or the recollection of whom has perished,
faces burnt by the sun.
yellowish or tanned complexions, and marks all over their bodies,


hair of whose skins serves as an ornament for cuirasses in his native
good-will of the natives, regarded as a home. The _Resolution_ cast

constructions to such perfection. These works are produced by them by
"During the following days the captain was visited by some of his old
of the island, and even the king sought his society. He married a
impossible to observe the movements. The fleet was to commence
refused.
sailed, on the 24th of April, and when Cook said that they should
narrative says,--
Admiralty.
Four days later Cook reached the Tonga archipelago once more. He
A native, who opposed the seizure of two pirogues by the English, as
the English by games and dancing, but on the morrow an incident
Cook took advantage of these friendly indications to land an armed
The exchanges continued after the _Resolution_ had set sail, and the
doubt Cook would have recognized in them that missing link between man
The _Resolution_ had only just left Port Sandwich when all the crew
Islands, and the largest of all, Sandwich Island, which must not be
recovered their health, and they looked forward to its speedy
medium height, but well-shaped, and their features are not
mass of burnt stones, perfectly sterile. From time to time it emitted
Cook imagined these people to be cannibals, although pigs, fowls,
good-hearted, when we did not excite their jealousy. We cannot blame
impossible to know with any certainty.
New Hebrides, by which appellation it is now known.
grass. Some trees with white trunks, like the willow in shape, were
hitherto heard.
open on two sides, like the hats of the Hungarian hussars. They hung
they replied, but if we continued our way seldom joined us in our

In its general features the country resembled various portions of New
the order called tetrodon by Linnus. Its head was hideous, wide and
that it was unwholesome. They showed their disgust of it, but neither
Cook describes the New Caledonians as tall, robust, active, polite,
stones used for their slings are smooth and oval. Their houses are
that the country was sparsely populated.
men to choose and cut the trees he needed. Some of them were twenty
neglected by the New Zealanders, but in spite of this several plants

are covered with snow, but those bordering the sea are not. We
"I was thus enabled," says Cook, "to distribute them to the entire
man perpetually tortured by the rigour of a climate is happy, I shall
sea-lion growled, and showing his tusks, seemed disposed to attack my
in the name of King George III. of England, bestowing his name upon
certain of their existence, it was unnecessary to remain, for to do so
left a letter relating all that had happened in New Zealand. Captain
beach, tightly corded. Some were full of roast flesh, and others of
The officer had not a sufficient force with him, being backed by only
fire, and that once fired it was necessary to reload before firing

CHAPTER V.
exist, was it practicable for ships? The attempt had quite lately been
gained by his two voyages round the world, he did not hesitate for a
Ocean to Hudson and Baffin Bays. In other words he was to look in an
to stock his vessels with the necessary stores for a two-years voyage.
As they agree in every particular with those of M. de Kerguelen, we
"They were of ordinary height, but rather slightly built. Their skin
board, they were so fully persuaded that the English had come to
Mai remarked, "In England they kill a man who assassinates another;
representations the inhabitants decided to come on board. Small, but
whose ears were adorned with red feathers. They soon perceived a score
them of setting fire to a cartridge.
and language were not unlike their own. They refused to return to

and clubs, appeared disposed to resent any attempt at landing.

have met no countenance in these islands so European in type."

On the 23rd, Finaou, who had represented himself as king of the entire
followers objected to his descending below decks, saying it was
house. We saw twelve dances during the time. They were executed by
their utility. Before leaving, he visited a cemetery or "Fiatooka,"
Eoa, where his old friend Tai-One received him cordially. The captain
project entertained by Finaou, and the other chiefs, of assassinating

Cook lost sight of the Tonga Islands on the 17th of July, and the
of Tairabon, where the welcome Mai received from his compatriots was
the kings feet, when he presented him with a tuft of red feathers,
before the king; last signs of the cannibalism which formerly existed
and forcibly. Towha could scarcely contain his anger.
much difficulty in bringing from Europe upon Otoo. They were geese,
the captain started for Huaheine with Mai who was to settle on that
how he had been treated, and that he should severely punish those who
conceived such an affection for the English, that it was necessary to
Huaheine, and the memory of his crimes was for a long time associated

[Illustration: Captain Cooks chart of Otaheite.]



may be seen, standing, the top of the heads disappearing in high
Clever, industrious, and intelligent, their plantations showed a
The natives testified their respect by kneeling before him. Clerke

made a long speech, which we understood as an invitation to land. In
the vessels had cast anchor, the captain had the sails furled, took in


[Illustration: Prince Williams Sound.]
He tried in vain to survey in various directions. The iceberg
Up to this date the passage through Behrings Strait had been the


and the top-mast struck. The vessels were crowded with visitors and
It became evident at last that they were encouraged by their chiefs,


the sake of his crew and for the advancement of science to the
devoutly prostrated at the entrance of the mora. After various

the bay "tabu," and prevented any communication with the strangers.
ascertain the opinion the Hawaians had formed of the English; but he

The officer in command of the detachment was ordered by Cook to draw
the pinnace to the English, together with several things which had
whom he said a few words on the theft of the sloop, he decided to pass
therefore sent away, and all directed their attention to the English.
the poniard one after the other, they all attacked him with ferocious
its coast, and lastly he visited the entire eastern coast of New
It is needless to praise his qualities as a seaman; his hydrographical
furious crowd armed with stones and sticks. In order to make an
Lieutenant Gore, and hoisted his flag upon the _Resolution_. After
The death of Captain Cook caused a general mourning throughout England.

END OF THE FIRST PART.

Lozier, a captain of one of the East India Companys ships, was so
company by constant firing, and were obliged to tack about continually,
The _Marie_, signalling danger, tacked about, but Bouvet, annoyed by
charts, which were used by Bouvet, "to be situated in 54 degrees S.

chilblains on the hands and feet. Still they were forced constantly to

admitted Surville to their schemes, and sent him to France to obtain
the Bashees, or Baschy Islands. Dampier had so named them after an
had sufficient courage and skill to swim to one of their pirogues,
Twenty-four hours later the _Saint-Jean Baptiste_ left the Bashees,

the vessel was sufficient to make them jump into their pirogues, or
pirogue stood a young man, resting upon a spear, who gravely watched
asked them to point out a spring.
natives fell upon them, wounding one soldier with a blow from a club,
and destroying the others."
French imagined they were at a fair distance, they launched two boats
He was bound securely, so that he might not throw himself overboard."
boiled, and pieces of cotton steeped in the decoction turned deep red.
reckoning all the islands discovered from the spot where the
well as numerous resinous or gum trees, the banana, sugar-cane, yams,
small beard; their expression is fierce. Some of the copper-coloured
The commonest ornament worn by the natives of Port Praslin is a
This island presented a delightful appearance. It was well cultivated,
but they spoke a different language, and could not make themselves
several pieces charged with grape shot, which put them to flight.

unfortunately, the Maoris were the sole spectators.
him. One of them ran to him at once, and was immediately seized and


young Aoutourou to Tahiti at his own expense and in a vessel belonging
Poivre, an intelligent governor and a friend to progress, approved of
The government had just sent a ships lieutenant, M. Kerguelen, to

upon which the vessels had left the Cape, until the 11th of January.
coarse sand mixed with coral. This land stretched away till it could
anchorage opposite the creek. I fancied I saw a cascade issuing from
Three days were occupied in repairs. The weather, which had hitherto
which stretched some ten or twelve leagues E.S.E.; but a dense fog,
bush in the island. Exposed to the continual ravages of the stormy
degrees 22 minutes E. long., that is to say within 1 degree 10 minutes
"The natives of the country," says Crozet, "came forward willingly.
handkerchiefs, and pieces of cloth. Fowls and ducks which had been
After another attempt at landing, which the natives opposed with great
food similar to that with which we are familiar on the Scandinavian
latitude.


demonstrations of friendship than usual. He was proclaimed head chief
He had received two lance thrusts in the side, and been much
companions. The savages had the bodies stripped, and commenced cutting

it would immediately be fired upon. An order was then given to the
molested.
collected on the ships. The provisioning of the ships with the seven
kitchen a mans skull was found which had been cooked some days before.
papers to discover his projects, and the plans for the prosecution of
Guaham Island, the largest of the Mariana group, was discovered. It
"In this condition," he says, "the natives gather it for food. They
contributed so zealously to the progress of navigation and
received by the Naval Academy, decided to entrust its examination to a
Kerguelen had at the same time published novel details of the manners
he had thoroughly explored.
As soon as the two vessels were equipped, Kerguelen set sail and
proving that we had passed above a submarine mountain. This new bank,
preparations for departure to such an extent that he was able to start
Unfortunately storm succeeded storm, and the two vessels with great
accident had happened to the _Gros-ventre_. Her boat had returned in
The _Roland_, and the frigate _Oiseau_, left Brest upon the 26th of
jury-masts."
various points, Croy Island, Re-union Island, Roland Island, which in
Upon the 8th of January, 1774, the _Roland_ signalled the frigate at
An adventurer named Beniowski, whose history is sufficiently curious,
council of war which deprived him of his rank, and condemned him to
although they did not result in discoveries, had an importance of
always the same, hence arose two important sources of error. The
four degrees in the declination of the needle was equivalent to a
observation, and if at the same time, the exact time at the port from

were sent on board the frigate, the _Enjoue_, which, leaving Havre,
The _Isis_, a frigate of eighteen guns, was equipped at Rochefort at

attempt criticism of the maps belonging to the Society; I wished to
astronomical observations which have been published at various times_;
Up to this time the watches had been examined separately and by
altogether wanting in Fleuriens publication, descriptions of the
imaginary glory, that every geographer, every narrator of voyages,

his companions--Botany Bay--No news of the Expedition--DEntrecasteaux
new field. The question arose as to the fittest person for the conduct

of the navigators to certain points. Lastly, Fleurien, the

of the astronomical watches, the naturalists, with several officers,
wore uniforms, and the rest merely shirts. The poverty of the land was
Saint Catherines Island, of which we have more than once had occasion

have been of great use to them for their pirogues."
and petrels, did not change his resolve. Cape Horn was rounded more
are equally prolific; and the country teems with innumerable flocks,
gold or silver tissues which were formerly manufactured at Lyons.
incident, the two frigates anchored upon the 9th of April in Cooks
Robberies, it is true, were frequent; but as the French intended
justified the opinion entertained of them. Upon reaching the Sandwich
the sea after watering the Indian plantations, of which there are so
Their acquaintance with iron and its use, for which they were not
there, as an object fit for conquest."

were sent to examine it.
situation would have been safe had we not anchored upon a rocky bottom,
bay, and set up tents for the sail makers and smiths. Although these
thoroughly to explore the depths of the bay. He imagined that some
Upon the chart of the Port des Franais, drawn up by MM. Monneron and
M. Boutin, before he came on deck, whether he had any news. At first I
for his own, he again approached the breakers, and in the hope of

[Illustration: Shipwreck of French boats outside the Port des Franais.
lat., and 139 degrees 50 minutes W. long., presents many advantages,
"But if the vegetable and animal productions of this country," says La
some of the principal personages on board my frigate, and loaded them
of February, in order to secure the following summer for the survey of
Hector forming the southern extremity of the latter.
Upon the 5th of September new islets were discovered, about a league
small and insignificant, and not endowed with that love of
a herd of deer, and then kill them with arrows."
carried with them a quantity of provisions of all sorts, which would
rigging, that we had been sixteen months at sea. Our ropes gave way,
but the manoeuvre took time, and when it was accomplished the vessel
Upon the 14th of December the _Astrolabe_ and the _Boussole_ sighted
sighted the coast of China, and next day cast anchor in the roadstead
at Macao for ten thousand piastres. The sum produced should have been
naturalists and geographical engineers, and the governor kindly lent
leads to the famous Bay Lake, which is distant seven leagues in the
eight hundred thousand piastres, the colony costs the Spanish
and received despatches from Europe by the frigate _La Subtile_, MM.
where no navigator had landed, coasted Kinin Island, which forms part
"It is scarcely possible," he says, "to find an island of pleasanter
Upon the 25th of May the frigates entered the channel of Corea, which
discovered.
quantity of snow was visible on the summits. No trace of inhabitants
with magnificent trees and luxuriant vegetation, appeared to be
green than is to be seen in France in the brightest spring. Before our
tomb. Curiosity induced them to open it, and they found in it two
After a stay in Saffren Bay, situated in 47 degrees 51 minutes N. lat.
cotton drawers worn in Madagascar. Two of the seven natives had coats

second opening, indicating that this too was a route for our ships.
We tried to make him understand our idea. He caught at it at once, and,
"In another bay upon the same shore, called Estaing Bay, the boats
were Manchurians, from the shores of Saghalien River. In the corner of
was much further south, determined to remain only five days in Casters
raw salmon, tearing it up very cleverly. They sucked out the mucilage,
given applies to them as well as to the men, from whom they are
La Perouse had already obtained. From them he ascertained that the
Oku-Jesso and Jesso; this they named after La Perouse. Hitherto the
Orotchys of Casters Bay, but less liberal in their dealings.
penetrated--La Boudeuse.

painful, and is rendered more so by a pitiful cry which escapes them
command of the Czar for the survey of the American coast. His
by land (at that time a most perilous journey), and to convey
ulcer upon her leg. Many of these islanders were covered with sores,

afforded the necessary change of diet.
for the health of his crew, that the spot which he named was perfectly
to sixty-one, and those the picked men of the expedition.
"The water-casks of the four boats were landed quietly, the soldiers
leading the way with his gun and the soldiers, he forbade firing until
of a sling, struck almost all who were in the sloop. M. de Langle had
"M. Boutin had imitated M. de Langle. He would not fire, and only gave
grounded. The natives at once decided to harass the wounded in their

same group, and which Bougainville had seen from a distance, was
Pola Island, also belonging to the Navigator Archipelago, was passed
natives of this group as belonging to the finest Polynesian race. Tall,
"These recollections affected our way of dealing with the Indians. We
the group, which had not been visited by the English navigator. As

centurys growth, has attained to such a height of civilization and
have received with regard to the northern portion of New Caledonia, to

The command of the expedition was entrusted to Vice-admiral Bruny
Billardire noticed a phenomenon which had already been observed by
all his plans, and exercise an unfavourable influence upon the
had declared himself quite ignorant of the facts stated by M. de Saint
steered for the passage between St. Paul and Amsterdam Islands.

confidence in his own strength. Some of these savages were naked, and
islands and detached rocks were perceived, which rendered the
"Upon the 9th of July," says La Billardire, "towards half-past four

which they coated the strings of their bows with resin, in such a way
vigorously.
Carteret. The currents were so rapid that the ships were carried past
from each, containing articles for distribution among the natives of
resistance to his wishes, followed up his command by blows from his
The only remark made by them is to the effect that the natives
The Exchequer Islands, discovered by Bougainville, several unknown low
Billardire congratulates himself upon the multiplicity of new plants
them. I can only compare the sound of this instrument to that of an
"The fort, called Victory Fort, is built of bricks; the governor and
been freed long before.
"Thus the company, consulting their own interest only, discourage all
bamboos, cloves, and arrack may be added to the list of shipments.
ignorant preservers had chosen full-grown nutmegs. Cloves, when once

discovered it, will always recall his invaluable service to the

Tempest Bay, which they had visited the preceding year. This spot was
He says, "There were about forty-two natives; seven grown men, and
vermin. We could not but admire the patience of a woman, whom we
anchored in Adventure Bay. After a stay of five days, spent in taking
talents for stealing everything which came in their way.
who generally go bare-headed. Their dexterity in robbing me, convinced
of age, and to whom the natives paid great respect, came on board.
thousand.
with fruit, thirteen musicians were seated, who sang together in
their heads upon their breasts, and as suddenly tossed them back.
This concert, it will be seen, was by no means equal to the splendid
exactly what had happened, treated all the islanders they met as

imposition, many portions of this circumstantial account bear the

waist a little bag, full of the oval stones which they throw from
"I will mention one of their many manoeuvres. A man offered to sell me
act harshly, as we had heard so much in their favour from Forsters
our account of this disgusting fact. They refused to believe that a

the natives, many of whom were killed or wounded. But in spite of the
Caledonia. But M. Jules Garnier states that a tradition exists of the
with the natives of Pine Island, should have heard nothing of these
1865, observed in the hand of one of their native escort, "an old
must have changed the disposition of the natives between the two
La Billardire ought to have pressed the natives upon this subject.
Leaving New Caledonia upon the 21st Floral,[6] DEntrecasteaux
was not destined to be removed for a long time yet.
Dampiers Strait. After sailing along the northern coast of New
Straits, and reached Sourabaya upon the 19th of October.
officers and men of science, amongst them Billardire, obstinately
Thus ended this unfortunate expedition. Although its principal object
Islands--Macao--Disappointment--Return to France--Discoveries made by
words himself now and again, and thus drew from Portlock the
crews during a voyage of three or four years.
required a fresh supply.

port, the captain decided upon visiting the remaining bays of Santa
Marquesas as in other countries. Some wear necklaces of red beads,
The English did not mention in their account of the natives an act of

unknown island.
sixth parallel. Marchand accordingly resolved upon making for Engano
Marchand bought a number of otter skins, one hundred of which were of
filthy habits make them repulsive. The coquetry which is innate in the
bowl is removable at pleasure, and when it is absent the opening in
The navigators were immensely astonished at seeing two enormous
Marchand had expected, and he therefore decided to send an expedition

Commodore Ansons glowing description of this island will be recalled.
prohibiting the introduction of furs into the ports of the empire
What were the scientific results of this expedition? Nothing to speak

Jackson and of English power in this fifth continent of the world. In
an open boat, is one of the most remarkable on record. It was not
coast. The south and north-western shores, the Gulf of Carpentaria,
No previous expedition had been so fortunate in the number of
desired. All the experiences of preceding navigators, in the latitudes
This survey accomplished, Leuvin, Edels, and Endracht Islands were
to the able mind which had laid down the route taken by La Perouse and
Upon the 19th of October, 1800, the two vessels left Havre amidst the
in that island, had consumed much valuable time, and the favourable
on shore, unable to obtain any but brackish water. They could not

the able hydrographer, Boullanger.
volcanic soil. The Basseterre, in Geography channel--low lands, which
lavished her treasures and delights with a liberal hand.
course to Timor Island, and he anchored there upon the 22nd of August,
engraving.)]
"The result of the examinations made by the officers of the
place one of his officers, M. Picquet, ensign, under arrest. All the
and the discovery of which was the result of a mistake, which might
was almost calm, and scarcely ruffled by the passage of the

particularly directed their attention, in the hope that by adding the
M. Boullanger, embarked in the long-boat, commanded by M. Maurouard,
What can have been his motive for forsaking his sailors and two of his


than half the crew were incapable of service. Two only of the helmsmen
the stormy waters were no longer passable; a thick fog prevailed, and
The _Gographe_ was awaited with eager impatience at Port Jackson,
coast, the town of Sydney is situated. Built upon two adjacent hills,
separates Tasmania from New Holland is preserved. Snuff-boxes made of
more worthy subject for the reflection of a philosopher or statesman
as they have accumulated, many of them having become husbands and
naturalists delighted in examining the famous vineyards of Rose Hill,
are thirty miles beyond Sydney. Lieutenant Dawes and Captain Tench
one third of the entire number.
We know now how very little exaggeration there was in these
the results of the observations made during the two voyages, also took
south-western coast of Australia, with the two gulfs opposite to them.
already have wearied the reader as much as it surprised the

importance, as being the only point throughout an extent of coast
solidly constructed of stones, connected with a small island, and
upon the level of brutes.
as a mark of confidence, they returned the presents to us with a
mouths seemed as black as the outside of their bodies.
same key, and accompanied their song with the same gestures. In spite
A new source of danger shortly afterwards arose, in the singular
had less reason to complain of him had he been in full possession of
varieties of seeds. In addition to all this, at least a hundred living
the united voyages of Carteret, Wallis, Furneaux, Meares, and even
The two navigators, French and English, have each fairly earned a
Shaw in Algeria and Tunis--Hornemann in Fezzan--Adamson at Senegal--
He published a book in two large quarto volumes, which embraced the
as they call their blankets. The women alone are employed in this
arranged very much in the same manner as the Arab hyke."
whom he obtained letters of recommendation to certain Cairo merchants
and adopted a style of dress likely to impose upon unsuspecting people.

the oasis of Ammon, and the ruins appeared to him to be of Egyptian
cleverly saved his life by boldly reading out a passage in the Koran
at intervals. This was the desert of Harutsch. It was necessary to
terrible, and when the wind blows from the south, it is all but
four thousand dollars to the Bey of Tripoli. Horneman, without giving
returned to Murzuk, and left it finally with a caravan upon the 7th of
its exploration. But before proceeding to the narrative of the
It is true that Adanson was by no means the first naturalist to
To him is due the first exact account of a gigantic tree called the
In spite of the interest of these and similar discoveries, there are


slept took fire, and the whole town was soon in flames. His
gold, ivory, wax, and slaves. Poultry, sheep, eggs, butter, milk,
in pencil and half effaced, reached Dr. Laidley. It was dated from
Yaouri, and made the acquaintance of several merchants, on their way
during his journey, deprived science of the result of all his fatigue
At once accepted by the Society, Mungo Park hastened his preparations,
resemble the Mandingoes, who are gentle and sociable. Tall and
The traveller soon reached the Falem river, the bed of which, near
by dipping me in milk, and they insisted that my nose had been pinched
do business."
the traveller was subjected by the brother and nephew of the king to
natives on the journey who were flying to Kasson to escape the horrors

Samea, a small village pleasantly situated, he was so cordially
toes and fingers, as if they doubted whether I was in truth a human
Benown to Walet is a distance of six days journey. No important town
obtained permission to accompany the king. The traveller hoped, by
landlord, with a great deal of diffidence, begged me to give him a
my mission--the long-sought-for, majestic Niger, glittering in the
"Sego, the capital of Bambara, at which I had now arrived, consists,
course of a year."
found growing naturally in the woods; and, in clearing land for
importunities of the natives and the perfidious insinuations of the
jeopardy. To return to Gambia was scarcely less perilous; to do so he
canoes lose sight of land for one whole day. From this lake the water
of Africa."
visible in his eye, he called to a slave who was working in the
attemata_ (money lost), whence I concluded the boy had been his
Kamalia, or Karfa Taura advised him to await the cessation of the
the most important in this part of Africa, was awaited, that the
and corrected this error, in his later maps of 1722 and 1727, no doubt
conduct of an expedition to the interior of Australia; but he refused
furnished by the African Society, were, to our thinking, partly the
succumbed to fatigue, or the fevers incidental to the inundations. The
English traveller, if he would seize his baggage, and then kill him,
as soon as the sad fact was realized that the writer had perished in
the part of the traveller, which neither the English editor nor the
Isaac, Mungo Parks guide, who had faithfully delivered the
and Timbuctoo, when we were pursued by these boats, which we repulsed
chief, once convinced that he should not see Mungo Park again,
explored the south of Africa in the interests of natural history.

experiences of his own.
pleasantly that I was quite puzzled whether to admire the dinner or my
return. When the frigates commanded by Captain Cook, the _Resolution_

crossing the Palmite, they entered a desert country, interspersed with
soot. A Hottentot who paints himself looks less naked, and more
The kraal, or Hottentot village, is a collection of huts in a circle,
too much exposed to the west winds; and thence he proceeded to the
flock is selected. It would be impossible to use the others for food.
first sight it would be taken for a common sparrow, but it is a little
towards the spot where the bees have made their home. Arrived at the
About the same time, between 1772-1775, Thunberg, the Swede, whom
his narrative is rich in important observations on the natural history,
to enrich science by descriptions and drawings of unknown species.
birds so that their plumage should retain all its original gloss, the
savage life, as it really is, more vividly before us than anything
Le Vaillant first crossed the Dutch districts already explored by
danger. If a snake approached, or a troop of monkeys were disporting
their varied colours lent such enchantment to the scene that some of
can easily imagine, he found letters from France awaiting him. One
He then visited the Schneuwberg mountains, the Karroo desert and the
they the broad flat faces and thick lips of their neighbours the
converted into a regular natural history museum.
the tropic of Capricorn on the west and the 14th meridian on the east.
not so in reality; but the illusion is sustained by their small bones,
"The Houzonanas," says the narrative, "are small in stature, the

exploration. A very few words will convey all that we have been able
Cazemb.

his leisure in studying Arabic monuments. He wished to publish a
Egypt. Leaving Djedda he proceeded to Mecca, Lobheia, and arrived at
Adowa was not originally the capital of Tigr. A manufacture of a
the farmer in Abyssinia is always very poor."
in a mountain of very red marble, having on the left a marble wall
dung." It was near Axum that Bruce saw three soldiers cut from a
ancient Siris, with its poisonous waters bordered by majestic trees.
history, which combined to make his work the most important hitherto
the mountain, he said, looking maliciously up into my face, that
at last I approached the island with its green sod. It was in the form
end, and in some parts is not above ten miles broad. Its greatest
valuables in troubled times."
new, no Europeans having previously explored it. Browne attained a
easily recognizable on them, and the proportions of their
Dendera, Kazr, Thebes, Assoan, Kosseir, Memphis, Suez, and Mount
and recommenced his applications for admittance to the Sultan. They
in rich stuffs of various kinds and all manner of colours. The space
be no easy task to leave it, and that in any case he must give up the
joined the caravan which was about to return to Egypt.
Some, chiefly fakeers or priests and traders, come from the west, and
The natives of Darfur are inured to hunger and thirst, but they
number of people, so that there was plenty for them to do."
Father Du Halde--Macartney in China--Stay at Chu-Sang--Arrival at
appeared under a new title. But it attracted little notice, as by this
useless to attempt any reproduction of this immense work, for which a
the author devotes several chapters to the population and natural
calculated to give Europeans a true idea of the Chinese character.
After a few necessary delays at Rio-de-Janeiro, St. Paul and Amsterdam
As soon as the sick had recovered and fresh provisions had been
"This stunted vegetation," says Macartney, "seems to be highly
which issue these fibres, with the branch immediately above them, are
effect."
went on board a yacht which had been prepared for him.
many windings of the river. The country through which they passed was
that the emperor was at his summer palace in Tartary, and that the
London, and contained not less than seven hundred thousand inhabitants.

the palace, called "The garden of eternal spring," it was necessary to
with the Chinese, for they have no coined money, but use ingots
found himself in a wide unpaved street, with houses on either side,
colour. Through the gate were seen artificial hills, lakes and rivers,
throne and a few vases of old china.


to give an impression of an enterprise of surprising grandeur. It
tribes. Such barriers as these would not suffice in modern times for
mountains are less wooded. The number of sufferers from gotre in the
continued here. At last Tchien Lung consented to content himself with
wore a velvet cap, very similar in shape to that of Scotch
president, raised above his head the magnificent square golden box
covered with a number of vessels containing meat and fruits. The
enclosure. The rest is sacred to the use of the women of the imperial
each other, Tchien Lung participating in them with great zest. Dancers
then assumed a regular form, and suddenly a beautifully coloured light
the first place, it was not customary for ambassadors to reside long
to plunge the instant they receive a sign from their masters. It is
We need not dwell upon the return voyage.
and upon reaching Syria he realized that he could not possibly acquire
wishes to illustrate the quality of the Egyptian soil, and in what
can be imputed to him, we must none the less recognize in him one of
Nominated ambassador at Constantinople, De Choiseul determined to
after a journey to London, where M. de Choiseuls business detained
question was almost forgotten, when the discoveries made quite
They only reached Constantinople at the end of the following May,
Upon their return to Constantinople they found a new ambassador, named
order a hundred Russian sailors whom he had taken prisoners on the


expeditions round the coast to collect particulars as to the climate,

her service by her favours. Pallas, in acknowledgment of them,
capital of Siberia; the province of Koliwan, upon the northern slopes
When his narrative was once arranged, written, and published, Pallas
desired to settle there. The empress bestowed some of the crown lands
Tartars. His wife died in the Crimea; and finally, disgusted with the


He was succeeded by Vasquez Coronado and Francisco Alarcon, who--the
an Englishman, Drake, who, after having sailed along the western coast
of St. Lazarus above Vancouvers Island; but all that he says about
knowledge, and there was every reason to suppose that their hunters
Vitus Behring, a Dane, and Alexis Tschirikow, a Russian, who had both
Not until June 4th, 1741, were Behring and Tschirikow in a position to
Exhausted by long illness, however, the explorer was now no longer

Carlos_ and _San Antonio_, and after a years search found again the

New Holland, ending in abrupt and precipitous cliffs, to which the
unfinished by Cook. A gale soon separated the _Discovery_ from the
number of inhabitants was already greatly diminished.
Port, Admiralty Entry, Birch Bay, Desolation Sound, Johnston Strait,
of the king in ordering this voyage, I flatter myself that our very
of his voyage to be finished by his brother.
cultivation, and many English squatters had already taken root, not,


time, that was no reason why a second attempt should not succeed.
August, and had arranged to spend the winter with an Indian tribe

water. A quantity of whale blubber was found in the tents of the
traveller to the French sailor was delayed until 1795.
It was Alexander Mackenzie who gave his name to it. Starting on the
is situated in N. lat. 69 degrees 11 minutes, Whale Island. On the

underwent led to the loss of his ears and legs. The victim of his
engraving.)]
river. The Portuguese were more fortunate. In 1636 and 1637 Pedro
river was badly drawn, as Father Fritz was too ill when he went down
and the greater number of the Peruvian towns at a distance from the
pongo.
In the midst of the woods near the ruined town of Santiago, where

the angle formed by the latter at the confluence, the position and
it small arrows tipped with a poison which causes instantaneous death.
which makes them drunk for twenty-four hours, and causes very

St. Paul is the first Portuguese mission. There the river is no less
used in dealing with the Indians.
port of Pauxis--beyond which the Maraon takes the name of the Amazon,
mouth of the Amazon, where he embarked for Cayenne, arriving there on

with Aim Bonpland, a young botanist, with whom he at once agreed to
explore the Spanish colonies, and take any astronomical or geodesic
wind, the great heat of the ground, which burnt our boots, and the
In July, Humboldt and Bonpland arrived at Cumana, in that part of
propose pushing on from it perhaps to San Carlos on the Rio Negro,

and so pure that it can be kept a year without turning rancid.
European climate.
Neufchtel in Switzerland. Nothing could give any idea of the richness

The yellowish livid gymnoti, resembling serpents, swam on the top of
"Others, panting for breath, with manes erect, and wild eyes full of
luxuriant vegetation such as is only met with in the tropics, were
of their fondness for bathing, and the relief it affords them,
[Illustration: Gigantic vegetation on the banks of the Temi.]
stopped by the hostility of the Guaharibos and the Guaica Indians, who
journey of more than 1300 leagues, but my poor comrade Bonpland, was,
We have seen what an important geographical discovery rewarded the
crocodiles tails, but this is a very false assertion. We saw
to facilitating the making of sugar, surveyed the coast of the island,
embarked at Cartagena, whence he proposed going first to Santa F de
cones of greyish clay, about twenty-five feet high, the mouths of
narrow channel and flows into the Magdalena basin. As a natural
vast precipice constantly rises a dense cloud of foam, which, falling
would be impossible, had not nature herself provided two bridges, one



valley, where one night will often bring on the fever known as the
Quito is a fine town, but the intense cold and the barren mountains
example. But we nearly perished. The Indian sank to the breast in a
could conceive anything drearier, more gloomy, or more awful than what
impossible to reach the crater of Cotopaxi.
of a palace of the Inca Fupayupangi, described by Condamine in the
proceedings, be enough to prove, if proof were needed, what a passion
cinders and clay 1700 feet high.
great quantity of snow which had recently fallen, Humboldt
weeks to make a cursory study of the political constitution of the

