THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER
The odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children and


“I never did see the beat of that boy!”

disappeared over it.
I know. He’s full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! he’s my own
to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the work.
“Yes’m.”
“But you ain’t too warm now, though.” And it flattered her to reflect
collar was securely sewed.

though--and loathed him.
feels who has discovered a new planet--no doubt, as far as strong, deep,
him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved--but only

“Well I ‘low I’ll _make_ it my business.”
“Oh yes--I’ve seen whole families in the same fix.”
“Say--if you give me much more of your sass I’ll take and bounce a rock

shoving with might and main, and glowering at each other with hate. But
Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said:
The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out

he said he “‘lowed” to “lay” for that boy.
the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in
the town pump had always been hateful work in Tom’s eyes, before, but
business--she ‘lowed _she’d_ ‘tend to de whitewashin’.”

But Tom’s energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had
heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and


“Say--I’m going in a-swimming, I am. Don’t you wish you could? But of



a kite, in good repair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in


knitting--for she had no company but the cat, and it was asleep in her
herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent. of
And while she closed with a happy Scriptural flourish, he “hooked” a
of capture and punishment, and hastened toward the public square of the
hair plaited into two long-tails, white summer frock and embroidered
but by-and-by, while he was in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic
bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it, and he hopped
aunt’s very nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it. He said:
so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold himself when the old
kind and loving; but she judged that this would be construed into a
lie there cold and white and make no sign--a poor little sufferer, whose
the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing, the while, that he could
of a second-story window. Was the sacred presence there? He climbed the


At the end of half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson,


“You bet you that’s so, Mary. All right, I’ll tackle it again.”
outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he
short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and beyond this line
uncomfortable. He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked; for there
and the other always remained too--for stronger reasons. The church’s

to recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses perfectly, but
had always made this boy come out and “spread himself.” Only the older
who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert--though
unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice had acquired a peculiar
The latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption of fights
moment he was “showing off” with all his might--cuffing boys, pulling
court-house--which was said to have a tin roof. The awe which these
books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that insect authority
There was only one thing wanting to make Mr. Walters’ ecstasy complete,
judicial one’s altitude, and the school had two marvels to gaze upon

“Tom.”
thousand verses is a great many--very, very great many. And you never can
two that were appointed?”
“_David And Goliah!_”
and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible. The crowd filed up
the pride of all the matrons. The boys all hated him, he was so
The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish, in a
earth.”
by stormy seas; for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of
additions unfair, and scoundrelly. In the midst of the prayer a fly had
argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod--and
Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed.
snatch at it, just missing it; made another, and another; began to enjoy
fly but found no relief; followed an ant around, with his nose close
possibility of impressiveness being at an end; for even the gravest
CHAPTER VI
called it, when it occurred to him that if he came into court with that
No result from Sid.
Tom moaned out:


“Oh, auntie, I’m--”
“Aunt Polly, it _seemed_ mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my
home from school.”
and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of fascination and
Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown
put on clean clothes; he could swear wonderfully. In a word, everything

“No! Is that so? I know something that’s better.”
told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and the




“Say! Why, Tom, I _know_ she is. She witched pap. Pap says so his own

‘Dern that cat!’ and so I hove a brick through his window--but don’t you


briskly, with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed. He
yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric

whispers traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon the
apparently unconscious. The girl made a sort of non-committal attempt
she was satisfied with the monster, and whispered:
“I’ll stay if you will.”
“Oh, it ain’t anything.”

moments, and finally moved away to his throne without saying a word. But
CHAPTER VII
the percussion-cap box came out. He released the tick and put him on

have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom’s fingers would

the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. The boys had been
another. In a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and

I’m going to be a clown in a circus when I grow up.”
“I reckon so. I don’t know. What is it like?”
“Ye--yes.”
easy.”
He turned his face away. She bent timidly around till her breath stirred
“Now it’s all done, Becky. And always after this, you know, you ain’t

uneasy, for a while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping

herself; and by this time the scholars began to gather again, and she
Hill, and the school-house was hardly distinguishable away off in the
clean Sunday-school record he could be willing to go, and be done with
a soldier, and return after long years, all war-worn and illustrious.
sash, his belt bristling with horse-pistols, his crime-rusted cutlass
Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle. He took it
Tom’s whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations. He had

repetition was successful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each
Tom called:

“Why, that ain’t anything. I can’t fall; that ain’t the way it is in the
me with a quarter-staff; or I’ll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and you be
They said they would rather be outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than
scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasize themselves. The ticking
single minute later he was dressed and out of the window and creeping
been read, on the most of them, now, even if there had been light.
“Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here?”
Tom, after a pause:

any harm. If we keep perfectly still, maybe they won’t notice us at
old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled the ground with innumerable
voice.”
The whisper died wholly out, now, for the three men had reached the
They growled a response and went on digging. For some time there was no


two forms, contemplating them. The doctor murmured inarticulately, gave



had the look of being, he won’t think of the knife till he’s gone so
apprehensively, as if they feared they might be followed. Every stump
“Huckleberry, what do you reckon’ll come of this?”

“By hokey, that’s so, Tom!”
make any more of drownding us than a couple of cats, if we was to squeak
little fragment of “red keel” out of his pocket, got the moon on
“What’s verdigrease?”
building, now, but they did not notice it.






“Oh, geeminy, it’s _him_!” exclaimed both boys, in a breath.

was up-hill work; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into
Sid; and so the latter’s prompt retreat through the back gate was

had at once sneaked off--suspicious circumstances, especially the washing
elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed anything in their
“Muff Potter!”

ground. Then he said:
“Why didn’t you leave? What did you want to come here for?” somebody
offer, in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master.

happened, now, but luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly’s face

of the village, and no guards were afforded for it; indeed, it
CHAPTER XII
these things. When something fresh in this line came out she was in a
angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the suffering
capacity as she would a jug’s, and filled him up every day with quack
romantic enough, in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have
“Don’t ask for it unless you want it, Peter.”
against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and making general havoc. Next

tea-spoon was visible under the bed-valance. Aunt Polly took it, held it
a new light; what was cruelty to a cat _might_ be cruelty to a boy, too.

was out, and “going on” like an Indian; yelling, laughing, chasing boys,

By this time he was far down Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to
But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been going

spreading the fact that pretty soon the town would “hear something.” All
“Huck Finn the Red-Handed, and Joe Harper the Terror of the Seas.” Tom
The Terror of the Seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn
conducting this thing in an unpiratical way.


peacefully sleeping, beyond the vague vast sweep of star-gemmed water,
spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to shelter their provisions;
of corn pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out on the grass,
“It’s just the life for me,” said Tom. “You don’t have to get up,

a disgrace.”
and things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships--make ‘em walk a

more difficulty in getting to sleep. They said their prayers inwardly,
in the Bible. So they inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in
upon the leaves and grasses. A white layer of ashes covered the fire,
curved body in the air and then came decisively down upon Tom’s leg and
catbird, the Northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom’s head, and trilled
sandbar. They felt no longing for the little village sleeping in the
a couple of sun-perch and a small catfish--provisions enough for quite a
astonished at. They discovered that the island was about three miles
For some time, now, the boys had been dully conscious of a peculiar


“But they don’t say anything over it,” said Huck. “I’ve seen ‘em and
The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing thought
jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious trouble
in with Tom, and the waverer quickly “explained,” and was glad to get
schoolboy treasures of almost inestimable value--among them a lump of
upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he had
his success, for he knew it was the boat’s last trip for the night. At

every kind of mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he

down. Tom was snuffling, now, himself--and more in pity of himself than
Missouri shore some five or six miles below the village--and then hope
Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so appealingly,
He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody at large
spent. It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the
“Which he is!” exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping
They went about poking sticks into the sand, and when they found a soft
went under in a tangle of white legs and arms and came up blowing,
ankle, and he wondered how he had escaped cramp so long without the
to tell, yet, but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon, he
fishing that’s here.”
thing--does it want to see its mother? And so it shall. You like it here,
Joe’s preparations so wistfully, and keeping up such an ominous silence.

They presently stopped and turned around. When he got to where they
tongue, and were not considered manly anyway.
that way--haven’t you, Huck? I’ll leave it to Huck if I haven’t.”
sick.”




startled faces, too. A deep peal of thunder went rolling and tumbling
ground. The boys cried out to each other, but the roaring wind and the
veil of rain. Every little while some giant tree yielded the fight


By and by they separated into three hostile tribes, and darted upon each
gained something; they found that they could now smoke a little without
BUT there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil Saturday

you was him--I was as close as that--and he smiled, just this way--and then
But that bid for glory was a failure. Most of the boys could say that,
reverently and stood until the mourners were seated in the front pew.
seemed rank rascalities, well deserving of the cowhide. The congregation
Aunt Polly, Mary, and the Harpers threw themselves upon their restored
And they did. Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and

“Well, I don’t say it wasn’t a fine joke, Tom, to keep everybody
tone that discomforted the boy. “It would have been something if you’d
“I wish now I’d thought,” said Tom, with a repentant tone; “but I dreamt


“You made him--you--Oh, you made him shut it.”
“So I did. So I did. Not the first time, neither. And then--”
“Shut your heads and let Tom go on! What did he say, Tom?”
“Just as true as I live!”
kissed you on the lips.”
and had His hand to help them over the rough places, there’s few enough
drink to him. Smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels, as proud
puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached.
knew she was about. Presently she gave over skylarking, and moved

“By and by. Maybe about vacation.”

in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what
did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly

minutes dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph began to
So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done--for she had said
had changed her mind. The thought of Tom’s treatment of her when she was


“It was to tell you not to be uneasy about us, because we hadn’t got
“I’d give the whole world to believe that--it would cover up a power
in her eyes.
her voice when she said:
She put the jacket away, and stood by musing a minute. Twice she put out
started to school and had the luck of coming upon Becky Thatcher at the
fine rage, nevertheless. He moped into the schoolyard wishing she were
that book under lock and key. There was not an urchin in school but was


right, though; she’d like to see me in just such a fix--let her sweat it
of that, and she tried to believe she was glad of it, but she found she
but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it. Most of the
master was gathering his wrath. Then he spoke: “Who tore this book?”
“Amy Lawrence?”
terror]--“did you tear--no, look me in the face” [her hands rose in
count the tedious time as loss, either.
VACATION was approaching. The schoolmaster, always severe, grew severer
conspired together and hit upon a plan that promised a dazzling victory.
his great chair upon a raised platform, with his blackboard behind him.
 etc.--accompanying himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic
house but he had the house’s silence, too, which was even worse than
Crusades. “Friendship” was one; “Memories of Other Days”; “Religion in
fashion from the schools, and it is not sufficient today; it never will
voluptuous votary of fashion sees herself amid the festive throng, ‘the
And so forth and so on. There was a buzz of gratification from time to
Tallassee’s warring floods, And wooed on Coosa’s side Aurora’s beam.

the romantic and young, a queen of beauty unadorned save by her own

increased. And well it might. There was a garret above, pierced with
without alteration from a volume entitled “Prose and Poetry, by a
grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a chance to display
The funeral was a fine thing. The Cadets paraded in a style calculated

delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder.
girls. Tom went about, hoping against hope for the sight of one blessed
he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about him.
lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he was. He drifted
and fears almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in
“Oh--‘course I haven’t.”
“Get me to tell? Why, if I wanted that halfbreed devil to drownd me they
“That’s just the same way they go on round me. I reckon he’s a goner.

something would happen that might clear away their difficulties. But
fishin’ places was, and befriend ‘em what I could, and now they’ve

sleep. All the village flocked to the courthouse the next morning, for
questioning, counsel for the prosecution said:

graveyard upon that morning which all present remembered so well was
“Your honor, in our remarks at the opening of this trial, we
audience listened breathless, but the words refused to come. After a few

“Any one with you?”
There was a ripple of mirth, which the court checked.

and fondled him as lavishly as it had abused him before. But that sort
been sealed with the dismalest and most formidable of oaths, Huck’s
hang a “clew” for murder, and so after that detective had got through
Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red-Handed. Huck would

they die. Anyway, it lays there a long time and gets rusty; and by and

“Why, Tom, it’ll take all summer.”
“No! Is that so?”
“Hop?--your granny! No!”


“Oh, that ain’t any use. Pap would come back to thish-yer town some day
“Well, that’s the foolishest thing you could do. Look at pap and my
“I’ll tell you some time--not now.”

of these hid treasures, it belongs to him. It don’t make any difference

in the murky nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the

“Well, I’ve been pretty much so, too, Huck. They most always put in a
“Well, it just is. Huck, I don’t feel comfortable a bit.”
shoulder all of a sudden and grit their teeth, the way a ghost does. I
you can bet there’s a ghost mighty close behind it. It stands to reason.
circumstances, they struck far off to the right, to give the haunted
Tom mentally ran over the days of the week, and then quickly lifted his
out, Huck.”

and plug a ten-cent piece every time, a mile and a half.”
Hill.
place, that they were afraid, for a moment, to venture in. Then they
promise was a fraud--there was nothing in it. Their courage was up now



thoughtful silence, Injun Joe said:
nod; his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore now.
and then they were grateful to note that at last the sun was setting.
take it away till we start south. Six hundred and fifty in silver’s
his knees in the corner, now, digging with his bowie-knife.
“What is it?” said his comrade.
the weeds in the corner the other side of the fireplace--I saw it a
“I know it,” said Injun Joe; “and this looks like it, I should say.”
earth on it! [The boys were sick with terror in a moment.] What business
out. Presently he said:
let them _stay_ there--who cares? If they want to jump down, now, and get
absorbed in hating themselves--hating the ill luck that made them take

it wasted to nothingness in his fingers as sleep forsook him and
real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable dollars.

devil going for me all through ‘em--rot him!”

In the less ostentatious house, No. 2 was a mystery. The tavern-keeper’s
Tom thought a long time. Then he said:


midnight the tavern closed up and its lights (the only ones thereabouts)
and closer to the alley; fearing all sorts of dreadful things, and
get my breath I was so scared. They wouldn’t turn in the lock, either.

“How?”
“And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle alongside of Injun Joe ain’t
and that’ll fetch me.”
time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it.
THE first thing Tom heard on Friday morning was a glad piece of

“Then I’ll stay with Susy Harper, mamma.”
“But what will mamma say?”
Tom that maybe Huck might come this very night and give the signal. The
began. After the feast there was a refreshing season of rest and chat in
down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamor of laughter and a
knew as much of the cave as any one.
adventures was romantic and therefore satisfactory. When the ferryboat
time, but nothing happened. His faith was weakening. Was there any use?
a crossstreet. They went straight ahead, then, until they came to the
if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once, and so weak that he
kind to him more than once, and maybe these men were going to murder
a millionth part of it! He had me _horsewhipped_!--horsewhipped in
to the bed. If she bleeds to death, is that my fault? I’ll not cry, if
gingerly back; planted his foot carefully and firmly, after balancing,
“Let me in--quick! I’ll tell everything.”
 exclaimed the old man; “out with it and nobody here’ll ever tell, lad.”

These were strange words to the vagabond boy’s ears, and the pleasantest

we quit chasing, and went down and stirred up the constables. They got a
of the widow’s one day, and they slunk away. Off with you, boys, and

“Well, you see, I’m a kind of a hard lot,--least everybody says so, and

the old man from getting the faintest hint of who the Spaniard might be,

“Of _what_?”
Huck was in a close place--the inquiring eye was upon him--he would have
Rest and sleep will fetch you out all right, I hope.”

visitors, and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he
There was no Sabbath-school during day-school vacation, but everybody
Mrs. Thatcher turned pale, and sank into a pew, just as Aunt Polly,
“No’m.”
street, and within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and

village, but the strongest of the citizens continued searching. All the
forth and a score of men go trooping down the echoing aisle--and then a
Huck started up in bed, wildeyed:
forever! But what could she be crying about? Curious that she should
NOW to return to Tom and Becky’s share in the picnic. They tripped along
in gleaming and imperishable stone. Tom squeezed his small body behind
of a cavern whose walls were supported by many fantastic pillars which
deep stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the


“Listen!” said he.
his steps. It was but a little while before a certain indecision in his
his bosom, she clung to him, she poured out her terrors, her unavailing
By-and-by Tom took Becky’s candle and blew it out. This economy meant so
were grown thread-bare with use, and sounded like sarcasms. Fatigue bore

fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay. Thought

That little piece is our last candle!”
“Why, I reckon maybe they are. I hope they are.”
also--that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before Mrs. Thatcher
they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search was going
faintest, far-off shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky by
a moment or two more and they had gone altogether. The heart-sinking
and then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands

of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from the cave;
and gone back to their daily avocations, saying that it was plain the
huzzah!
kite-line would reach; how he followed a third to the fullest stretch
and told them their situation and their famished condition; how the men
did not leave her room until Sunday, and then she looked as if she had
Thatcher’s house was on Tom’s way, and he stopped to see Becky. The

men were on their way to McDougal’s cave, and the ferryboat, well filled
Injun Joe’s bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The great
stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages, builded
years to be ready for this flitting human insect’s need? and has it

there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he wanted
follered Injun Joe to the widder’s.”
“Huck, that money wasn’t ever in No. 2!”
“Earnest, Huck--just as earnest as ever I was in my life. Will you go in
“All right--it’s a whiz. When do you say?”
“All right. We want some bread and meat, and our pipes, and a little

“Well, it just does, Tom. And who’ll we rob?”
off and talk polite. They ain’t anybody as polite as robbers--you’ll see
He showed Huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of clay
“Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see that? There--on the

“Tom, I didn’t think of that. But that’s so. It’s luck for us, that


well soaked with the water-drip.

to the skiff.”
sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and started off,
“I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool away

many more, and all dressed in their best. The widow received the boys
thanks, Huck--Mr. Jones bought one and I the other. But they’ll fit both


“Secret about what, Sid?”
things, and you can’t bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones.
effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances. However,
the silence was a little awkward. Tom broke it:
“There--what did I tell you? Half of it’s Huck’s and half of it’s mine!”
more than that in property.
some of them. Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were courted, admired,
simple days--and clothe him and wash him, too, for that matter.
Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great soldier some
turned, the bars and shackles of civilization shut him in and bound him
said:

Tom. Looky-here, Tom, being rich ain’t what it’s cracked up to be. It’s
I’ll stick to ‘em, too. Blame it all! just as we’d got guns, and a cave,

said:
“Have the which?”

history of a _man_. When one writes a novel about grown people, he knows
OF

thousand dollars apiece--all gold.  It was an awful sight of money when
sweat and sweat, and feel all cramped up.  Well, then, the old thing
Pretty soon I wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let me.  But she
like that, Huckleberry--set up straight;” and pretty soon she would
would go there, and she said not by a considerable sight.  I was glad
something that’s on its mind and can’t make itself understood, and so
I set down again, a-shaking all over, and got out my pipe for a smoke;
CHAPTER II.
together.  There was a place on my ankle that got to itching, but I
one of mine.  My nose begun to itch.  It itched till the tears come into
in the kitchen and get some more.  I didn’t want him to try.  I said Jim
it he said they rode him down to New Orleans; and, after that, every
saying something to it; but he never told what it was he said to it.

wrote the oath on, and read it.  It swore every boy to stick to the
pirate-books and robber-books, and every gang that was high-toned had

“Nothing only robbery and murder,” Tom said.
“Ransomed?  What’s that?”

they get here?”
more.”


Deacon Winn get back the money he lost on pork?  Why can’t the widow get
widow’s Providence, but if Miss Watson’s got him there warn’t no help
he was floating on his back in the water.  They took him and buried him
and marked.  But I couldn’t see no profit in it.  One time Tom sent a
so I was on hand next day, Saturday, in the ambuscade; and when we got
and so on, but we had enemies which he called magicians; and they had

got to do it before sun-up next morning, too.  And more:  they’ve got


a bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly, but before the cold weather I
of them kind; so I never tried to do anything, but just poked along
Thatcher’s as quick as I could get there.  He said:
He looked surprised.  He couldn’t seem to make it out.  He says:

everything.  So I went to him that night and told him pap was here
it and bit it and rubbed it, and said he would manage so the hair-ball
roun’ ‘bout him.  One uv ‘em is white en shiny, en t’other one is black.

mixed-up whiskers.  There warn’t no color in his face, where his face
_don’t_ you?”


“I’ll give you something better--I’ll give you a cowhide.”
hain’t heard nothing but about you bein’ rich.  I heard about it


of his son, and he’d make it warm for _him_.
hand, and says:
time; and towards daylight he crawled out again, drunk as a fiddler, and
for Judge Thatcher in the courts to make him give up that money, and he
Finn’s boss.  So he watched out for me one day in the spring, and
used to being where I was, and liked it--all but the cowhide part.
locking me in.  Once he locked me in and was gone three days.  It was
putting the candle out.  I got under the table and raised the blanket,
and be so cramped up and sivilized, as they called it.  Then the old man
The old man made me go to the skiff and fetch the things he had
I was cooking supper the old man took a swig or two and got sort of
up’ards, and jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this, and lets
a white man.  He had the whitest shirt on you ever see, too, and the
put up at auction and sold?--that’s what I want to know.  And what do you
cabin considerable, first on one leg and then on the other, holding
tumbled down on his blankets by and by; but luck didn’t run my way.
and striking and grabbing at the air with his hands, and screaming and
hear him through the blanket.
So he dozed off pretty soon.  By and by I got the old split-bottom chair
was after sun-up, and I had been sound asleep.  Pap was standing over me
in a minute.”
clothes and all on, and struck out for the canoe.  I just expected
a bunch of willows, and there was the old man down the path a piece just
water, and he says:
more stuff; but that warn’t pap’s style.  Nine logs was enough for one
out the place.  I wanted an axe, but there wasn’t any, only the one out
followed around to see.  I stood on the bank and looked out over the
would take an interest in this kind of business, and throw in the fancy
and full of rushes--and ducks too, you might say, in the season.  There
that killed me and took the things.  They won’t ever hunt the river for

soft but quick in the shade of the bank.  I made two mile and a half,
laughed, but he didn’t laugh; he ripped out something brisk, and said
It didn’t take me long to get there.  I shot past the head at a ripping

freckled places swapped about a little, showing there was a little
I was pretty hungry, but it warn’t going to do for me to start a fire,
of quicksilver, and set my teeth in.  It was “baker’s bread”--what the
close, where the bread did.  When she’d got pretty well along down

under steam, and booming once in a while as they went.  I crossed over
stars and drift logs and rafts that come down, and then went to bed;
home. About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake,
in my craw; but I says, this ain’t no time to be fooling around.  So I
cooked a supper, and I had about made up my mind I would stay there
do me no good.  By and by I says to myself, I can’t live this way; I’m
and knowed the day was coming.  So I took my gun and slipped off towards
He bounced up and stared at me wild.  Then he drops down on his knees,
“What’s de use er makin’ up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich

So we went over to where the canoe was, and while he built a fire in
Then I told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart.  He said Tom
“Blamed if I would, Jim.”
“Well, you see, it ‘uz dis way.  Ole missus--dat’s Miss Watson--she pecks
 ‘Long ‘bout six in de mawnin’ skifts begin to go by, en ‘bout eight er

whah de lantern wuz.  De river wuz a-risin’, en dey wuz a good current;
didn’t you get mud-turkles?”
same way when young birds done it.  I was going to catch some of them,
it looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck, and so I asked
“Well, are you rich?”
“So you lost the ten dollars.”
er de year.
see I warn’t lucky.  De dream say let Balum inves’ de ten cents en he’d
“Well, it’s all right anyway, Jim, long as you’re going to be rich again


summer storms.  It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black
“Jim, this is nice,” I says.  “I wouldn’t want to be nowhere else but
Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe, It was mighty cool
we didn’t show ourselves in daylight.

was the ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal.
old bedquilt off the bed, and a reticule with needles and pins and
ways off.  I paddled over to the Illinois shore, and drifted down most
wishing I knowed who shot the man, and what they done it for.
“Never you mind, honey, never you mind.  Don’t you git too peart.  It’s
it down.
so did his leg; but by and by the drunk begun to come, and so I judged
got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower, and spread himself out so
coat it over so and make a ball of it.  It was as big a fish as was ever
sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin, and then for a body to look in
window.  There was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by

here at a farm; so I ain’t hungry no more.  It’s what makes me so late.
the river, and her relations down the river, and about how much better
like to know who killed him.  Some think old Finn done it himself.”
old Finn, too--two hundred dollars.  You see, he come to town the
 People do say he warn’t any too good to do it.  Oh, he’s sly, I reckon.
ain’t far from here.  I’m one of them--but I hain’t talked it around.  A
it. My hands shook, and I was making a bad job of it.  When the woman
likely be asleep, and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up
say something more; the longer she set still the uneasier I was.  But
Well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was, and how poor
would hive the next one.  She went and got the lump of lead and fetched

‘prentice, that’s all.  It ain’t anything.  There ain’t no harm in it.
uncle Abner Moore would take care of me, and so that was why I struck
“Hold on a minute.  I’ll put you up a snack to eat.  You might want it.”
“North side.”
calico.  You do a girl tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe.
you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus, which is me, and I’ll do what I can


shore; and it was well a boat didn’t come, for we hadn’t ever thought to

as they didn’t.
coming down-stream, to keep from getting run over; but we wouldn’t have
Every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black hillsides,
say, anyway.
right before that, but it was all comfortable now.  I was glad the way
distinct.  She was leaning over, with part of her upper deck above
“I doan’ want to go fool’n ‘long er no wrack.  We’s doin’ blame’ well,
wouldn’t. He’d call it an adventure--that’s what he’d call it; and he’d
end of the skylight, and clumb on to it; and the next step fetched us in
you’ve swore ‘t if you didn’t you’d tell.  But this time you’ve said
“I’d _like_ to!  And I orter, too--a mean skunk!”
Bill says:
 The man came a-pawing along in the dark, and when Packard got to my
“He’s said he’ll tell, and he will.  If we was to give both our shares
that so?”
“Well, we can wait the two hours anyway and see, can’t we?”
start at the raft, and--”
said he didn’t believe he could go any further--so scared he hadn’t
set down.  It was Packard.  Then Bill _he_ come out and got in.  Packard

last sign of her, and we was safe, and knowed it.
it, in a place where it’s a good hiding-place for you and the skiff, and
go for it. The skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole

and the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head
“Why, pap and mam and sis and Miss Hooker; and if you’d take your
“Good land! what are they doin’ _there_, for gracious sakes?”
disremember her name--and they lost their steering-oar, and swung
somehow. I was the only one that could swim, so I made a dash for it,
“Great guns! is _he_ her uncle?  Looky here, you break for that light
proud of me for helping these rapscallions, because rapscallions and
wreck for Miss Hooker’s remainders, because the captain would know her

was right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon level head for a

parlyment; and if everybody don’t go just so he whacks their heads off.
Sollermun de wises’ man dat ever live’.  I doan’ take no stock in
“_Well_, den!  Warn’ dat de beatenes’ notion in de worl’?  You jes’
“Who?  Me?  Go ‘long.  Doan’ talk to me ‘bout yo’ pints.  I reck’n I
chile in two as a cat. Dey’s plenty mo’.  A chile er two, mo’ er less,
“Dat’s good!  But he’ll be pooty lonesome--dey ain’ no kings here, is

“Well, it’s a blame ridicklous way, en I doan’ want to hear no mo’ ‘bout
“It’s natural and right for ‘em to talk different from each other, ain’t
“No.”
I see it warn’t no use wasting words--you can’t learn a nigger to argue.
ahead in the canoe, with the line to make fast, there warn’t anything
out into the solid white fog, and hadn’t no more idea which way I was
time, but he never did, and it was the still places between the whoops
me off to the left and shot by, amongst a lot of snags that fairly
ever think of that.  No, you _feel_ like you are laying dead still on
anyway, because it was worse than chasing a Jack-o’-lantern.  You never

knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar.  The
“What’s the matter with you, Jim?  You been a-drinking?”
anywheres.  Where would I go to?”
de fog?”
you’ve been dreaming.”
“Well, den, I reck’n I did dream it, Huck; but dog my cats ef it ain’t
luck, ‘stead of keeping us out of it.  The lot of towheads was troubles

ashamed.”

up, how was we going to know we was passing a town?  Jim said if the two

time, “But you knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a

steal his children--children that belonged to a man I didn’t even know; a

or whether I warn’t.  When I was fifty yards off, Jim says:
“Yes, sir.”

by myself.”
headline, you won’t have to come a-near the raft--please do.”
miles, and you’ll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river.  It
“That’s so, my boy--good-bye, good-bye.  If you see any runaway niggers
right and ain’t no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the same?
“I was a-listenin’ to all de talk, en I slips into de river en was gwyne

won’t want.”
“Doan’ le’s talk about it, Huck.  Po’ niggers can’t have no luck.  I
for dark, and start back in the canoe and take the chances.  So we slept
us.
go out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs; but
overboard on one side and I on the other, she come smashing straight
so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was “treading water,” and


“Look here, if you’re telling the truth you needn’t be afraid--nobody’ll

unbarring and unbolting.  I put my hand on the door and pushed it a
they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor,

“Ain’t they no Shepherdsons around?”
all in good time, don’t you fret about that.  Go ‘long with you now, and
“But you can guess, can’t you?  It’s just as easy.”
dog--and he’ll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in.  Do
to hunt them and he warn’t heard of no more, and Tom and Mort died,
“I bet you can’t spell my name,” says I.
It was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too.  I hadn’t
up and got her in good shape, she would start in and strike a hundred
was, underneath.

to the top of her head, and knotted there in front of a comb like a
said was her greatest picture when she took sick, and every day and
This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and used to paste
Not these impaired the sacred name    Of Stephen Dowling Bots.
find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down
alive, and it didn’t seem right that there warn’t nobody to make some
plastered, and most had carpets on the floors, and the whole house was
that’s worth as much in a man as it is in a horse, so the Widow Douglas
frivolishness about him, not a bit, and he warn’t ever loud.  He was
the decanter was, and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him, and
when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks,
fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days, and have such junketings
coming.  We was crossing the road.  Buck says:
minute--‘twas pleasure, mainly, I judged--then his face sort of smoothed

“Why, where was you raised?  Don’t you know what a feud is?”
man that won the suit--which he would naturally do, of course.  Anybody

his hand and his white hair a-flying in the wind; and ‘stead of jumping
behind a little woodpile, and kep’ his horse before him to stop the
a powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and
road, and there warn’t anybody at the church, except maybe a hog or two,
mighty red in the face for a minute, and her eyes lighted up, and it

Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees hid
you--I wuz ‘fraid o’ de dogs; but when it ‘uz all quiet agin I knowed
“Our ole raf’.”
foun’ her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben’, en dey hid her in a



place before the log store, cussing and yelling, and trying to get at
too good a start; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree,
ambush.  Buck said his father and brothers ought to waited for their
them--lots of times I dream about them.
tugged at them till I got them ashore; then I covered up their faces,
bank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me, he was
shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can.”

water, was a kind of dull line--that was the woods on t’other side; you
on account of the woods and the flowers; but sometimes not that way,
axe flash and come down--you don’t hear nothing; you see that axe go
her to; then we lit the pipes, and dangled our legs in the water, and
have took too long to _make_ so many.  Jim said the moon could a _laid_

nothing, and was being chased for it--said there was men and dogs
in the cottonwoods and was safe.
“Well, I’d been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth--and
me the people was getherin’ on the quiet with their dogs and horses, and
comes handy, so it ain’t work.  What’s your lay?”
“To think I should have lived to be leading such a life, and be degraded

“Gentlemen,” says the young man, very solemn, “I will reveal it to you,



“You are what?”
do, we was so sorry--and so glad and proud we’d got him with us, too.
considerable; but the duke stayed huffy a good while, till by and by the
to be satisfied, and feel right and kind towards the others.
CHAPTER XX.
pretty poor, and had some debts; so when he’d squared up there warn’t

take my bed; but the king allowed he wouldn’t.  He says:
We got away as soon as it was good and dark.  The king told us to stand
bum! bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum--and the thunder would go rumbling
he reckoned they warn’t high enough yet to do any harm; but he was
celebrated Dr. Armand de Montalban, of Paris,” would “lecture on the
“You shall, then, before you’re three days older, Fallen Grandeur,” says
So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was, and
satisfied; so the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the
too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting, about two mile back in the
everywheres, feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep



without money, he would get there anyway, and every time he convinced
up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to remember him by; and he

up and ready to print in the paper, and didn’t charge nothing for it.
captured him up the river, and were too poor to travel on a steamboat,
hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight of it.
had so much trouble, he’d forgot it.
learn him over and over again how to say every speech; and he made him

Ah, it’s sublime, sublime!  Always fetches the house.  I haven’t got
 This is the speech--I learned it, easy enough, while he was learning it
resolution, like the poor cat i’ the adage, Is sicklied o’er with care.
when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw, we come in sight

Romeo...................................... Mr. Garrick.
Richmond................................... Mr. Kean.

people driving them out.

Lafe Buckner, then I’ll loan you one or two ton of it, and won’t charge
“Here, gimme the _chaw_, and you take the _plug_.”
there was a dog fight.  There couldn’t anything wake them up all over,
The nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the

first, and spoon vittles to top off on.”
“Come out here, Sherburn! Come out and meet the man you’ve swindled.
stirred, and there warn’t no more laughing.  Boggs rode off
to her.  If anybody can persuade him, she can.”
girl coming on the run, and two men with her.  Boggs and the men turned

that had the places wouldn’t give them up, and folks behind them was
heads to show they understood, and stooping a little and resting their

jam together, and you couldn’t hear yourself think for the noise.  It
sneaky. Then pretty soon Sherburn sort of laughed; not the pleasant
The average man’s a coward.  In the North he lets anybody walk over him

half-a-man with you”--tossing his gun up across his left arm and cocking
It was a real bully circus.  It was the splendidest sight that ever was
And then faster and faster they went, all of them dancing, first one
_could_ think of so many of them, and so sudden and so pat, was what I
with two circus men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him, and the
the air, and altogether he shed seventeen suits. And, then, there he


when the king got done capering and capered off behind the scenes, they
“What, is it over?  Is that _all_?”
Next day you couldn’t hear nothing around that town but how splendid
for me; I couldn’t stand it.  Well, when the place couldn’t hold no more
“Well, how’d the old thing pan out this time, duke?”  He hadn’t been

dey is; dey’s reglar rapscallions.”
ordering up eggs.  ‘Fetch up Nell Gwynn,’ he says.  They fetch her up.
father, the Duke of Wellington.  Well, what did he do?  Ask him to show

could hear of a country that’s out of kings.”
was asleep, and saying, “Po’ little ‘Lizabeth! po’ little Johnny! it’s

do’ dat open innerds--jis’ den, ‘long come de wind en slam it to, behine

and painted Jim’s face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead,
wouldn’t wait for him to howl.  Why, he didn’t only look like he was
like the orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he’d take off
a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing the
He asked the king where he was going, and the king told him he’d come

“Oh, yes; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took; because Peter
“Oh, he lives in England--Sheffield--preaches there--hasn’t ever been in
hare-lip.”
everything in that blessed town, and all about the Wilkses; and about

got off.  The king never said nothing about going aboard, so I lost

put off in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to carry ‘em, can’t it?”
back, and says:
like they’d lost the twelve disciples.  Well, if ever I struck anything
“Is it _them_?”
Then the king he hunched the duke private--I see him do it--and then he
coffin, and let on to pray all to themselves.  Well, when it come
thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother’s heart, because out
family would take supper here with them this evening, and help set up
he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said “Goo-goo--goo-goo-goo”
to Harvey and William, and told where the six thousand cash was hid down
“It ain’t no use talkin’; bein’ brothers to a rich dead man and

“It’s a most amaz’n’ good idea, duke--you _have_ got a rattlin’ clever
When we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table, and the king
so at sech a time?  If I know William--and I _think_ I do--he--well, I’ll
“You _dear_ good souls!--how _lovely_!--how _could_ you!”
And so he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself talk, and
“I say orgies, not because it’s the common term, because it
The king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and says:
he did was a fraud and a liar.  The poor girls was hanging to the king
Mary Jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was handsome!  She
day.” And away he went.
sleep on a cot; and up garret was a little cubby, with a pallet in it.
and I stood behind the king and the duke’s chairs and waited on them,


“I _didn’t_ nuther.”
sea?”
“Gets it the way people down here gets Congress-water--in barrels.  There
“Where do you set?”
played another chicken bone and got another think.  Then I says:

week, and Fourth of July?”
different from a common servant and _had_ to go to church whether he
I see it warn’t nothing but a dictionary, so I laid my hand on it and
can’t he?”

she could do it again.
fetch in help I’d get mixed up in the business before it was done with,
his room and begun to paw around there.  But I see I couldn’t do nothing
us to be down there a-whoopin’ up the mournin’ than up here givin’ ‘em a
That made me feel pretty bad.  About an hour or two ago it would a been
suff’rers; because as soon ‘s it’s found out ‘at we didn’t own it--which

“Your head’s level agin, duke,” says the king; and he comes a-fumbling
of the house somewheres, because if they missed it they would give the

so cold, and then I run back across the room and in behind the door.
money ‘ll be found when they come to screw on the lid.  Then the king
set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs, and then

outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever heard; it was only
glided around three sides of the room, and then rose up, and shaded his
soft as mush, and screwed it down tight and fast.  So there I was!  I
and made himself ever so friendly; and he give out the idea that his
the property for auction straight off--sale two days after the funeral;
account and the niggers would be back home in a week or two.
our gang warn’t around.

all come _out_ at once but just one time.”
up.”
song--that draft?”
and say noth’n’:  mum’s the word for _us_.”


the children warn’t ever going to see each other no more--and then busted
eased-up, like a person that’s had a tooth pulled out.  So I went to
“Yes; Mr. Lothrop’s.  Why?”
“Don’t you holler.  Just set still and take it like a man.  I got to
“The brute!  Come, don’t waste a minute--not a _second_--we’ll have them
I got to travel with them a while longer, whether I want to or not--I

and you must stand by me all you can.”
and ask for some witnesses--why, you’ll have that entire town down here
straight for Mr. Lothrop’s.”


them; and I stole it to give to you; and I know where I hid it, but I’m
mind letting me off; but I’ll write it for you on a piece of paper, and

I’ve thought of her a many and a many a million times, and of her saying
told me to tell you she’s gone over there in a dreadful hurry--one of

“Because it’s mixed up with other things.”
“Well, ther’ ain’t no sense in it.  A body might stump his toe, and take
Harvey and--”
great pity, but my church matters has got to get along the best way they

over for to ask the Apthorps to be sure and come to the auction and buy
Doctor Robinson.  I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neat--I
for wanting to swallow _everything_.  Well, whilst they was at it a
joke about it, and I judged it would strain the duke and the king some
“This is a surprise to me which I wasn’t looking for; and I’ll
for a fraud that’s got to make signs, and ain’t learnt how.  Lost
town?”
“I warn’t up at the Pint in the mornin’.”

the hand, and was plenty kind enough, but he never let go my hand.


kept it up; and it _was_ the worst mixed-up thing you ever see.  They
anyway.
brother’s, and then they’ll know it’s all right.”
_them_ again; and then says:  “These old letters is from Harvey Wilks;
can com--”
_then_! Indeed he wouldn’t.  Said it warn’t no fair test.  Said his

tell you what’s tattooed on his breast.  It’s jest a small, thin, blue

le’s ride ‘em on a rail!” and everybody was whooping at once, and there
“We’ll do it!” they all shouted; “and if we don’t find them marks we’ll
lightning beginning to wink and flitter, and the wind to shiver amongst
When they got there they swarmed into the graveyard and washed over it
At last they got out the coffin and begun to unscrew the lid, and then


in my mouth and I went overboard backwards; for I forgot he was old King
over the water, here they come!--and just a-laying to their oars and
hey?”
out.  It didn’t seem no good for _me_ to stay--I couldn’t do nothing,
it. But the duke says:
absent-minded like:
“On the contrary, I did.”



“If you ever deny it again I’ll drown you.  It’s _well_ for you to set
“Dry up!  I don’t want to hear no more out of you!” says the duke.  “And

kangaroo does; so the first prance they made the general public jumped
into somebody’s house or store, or was going into the counterfeit-money
So we stayed where we was.  The duke he fretted and sweated around, and
out of breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out:

like picking up money out’n the road.”
the plantation he’s frum, below Newr_leans_.  No-sirree-_bob_, they
slave, and so I’d better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to
slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being
warn’t no use to try and hide it from Him.  Nor from _me_, neither.  I
and wrote:
a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing.  But somehow I
says to myself:
the river a piece, and as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with my
lay of the land. According to my plan, I was going to turn up there from

the world, and now I’m in a strange country, and ain’t got no property
“We never thought of that.  Fact is, I reckon we’d come to consider him
“How can he blow?  Hain’t he run off?”
“I don’t want to blow on nobody; and I ain’t got no time to blow, nohow.
was. He wouldn’t trust me; he wanted to make sure of having me out of
wanted to be left free to work my plans.
around, because I wanted to stop Jim’s mouth till these fellows could
always think they’re talking about _you_.  As a general thing it makes a
the back fence, and some outbuildings down a piece the other side;
to Providence to put the right words in my mouth when the time come; for
and then the rest followed; and the next second half of them come back,
I out with a “Yes’m” before I thought.

I didn’t rightly know what to say, because I didn’t know whether the
“Well, it’s lucky; because sometimes people do get hurt.  Two years ago
and out a piece in the country, to put in the time and not get here too
“The captain see me standing around, and told me I better have something


you’ve missed him along the road.  I _know_ it’s so--something tells me


three days to fix it.  If I’d a called it a bolthead it would a done
I druther he wouldn’t take no trouble about me.

all?_”
it’s your’n; and you turn back and fool along slow, so as to get to the


“Why, this is wonderful!  Whoever would a thought it was in that mare
Sally she see it through the window, because it was only about fifty
he come ca’m and important, like the ram.  When he got a-front of us he
us; and then we’ll hitch up and take you down to Nichols’s.”
persuaded, and come in; and when he was in he said he was a stranger

“Well, I don’t know.  Only, they--they--told me you would.”
“I’m sorry, and I warn’t expecting it.  They told me to.  They all told
looked around slow, like he wished he could run across a friendly eye
“No, not till you’ve asked me first.”
was a mistake, Aunt Sally.  This ain’t no healthy place for a stranger
neither, the way I’ve seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times.
So there it was!--but I couldn’t help it.  Tom and me was to sleep in the
and as they went by I see they had the king and the duke astraddle of a
So we poked along back home, and I warn’t feeling so brash as I was

“So ‘d I. Well, it wasn’t for a dog.”
right--I’m glad we found it out detective fashion; I wouldn’t give shucks
“All right--bring it out.”
I never said nothing, because I warn’t expecting nothing different; but
respectable and well brung up; and had a character to lose; and folks at
“Didn’t I _say_ I was going to help steal the nigger?”
no more noise than country dogs is always doing when anything comes by
“Well, then,” I says, “how ‘ll it do to saw him out, the way I done
with it; and there warn’t no floor to the shed, nor nothing in it but

 So Tom says:

We could see pretty well now.  Tom he looked at the nigger, steady and
 _what_ did he sing out?” And turns to me, perfectly ca’m, and says,

 Please to don’t tell nobody ‘bout it sah, er ole Mars Silas he’ll scole
and says:

the chain.  And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the

so, and swallow the sawdust, so it can’t be found, and put some dirt and
the cabin?”
“Well, some of the best authorities has done it.  They couldn’t get the

with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you’re born.  Now, the way I look at
“Borrow a shirt, too.”
“_Prisoners_ don’t have geese running around the donjon-keep to pull
Iron Mask always done that, and it’s a blame’ good way, too.”
“Why, blame it all, it ain’t the _prisoner’s_ plates.”
don’t blame them for it, either.  It ain’t no crime in a prisoner to
that, though I couldn’t see no advantage in my representing a prisoner

wouldn’t furnish ‘em to a king.”
of, and I’ve read all the books that gives any information about these


me none, after I got my hand in.  So I’ll mosey along now, and smouch a


night this way we’d have to knock off for a week to let our hands get
Sunday-school book; and if a pick’s the handiest thing, that’s the thing


he could use them over again.  So Tom was satisfied.  Then he says:
the job was done.  We crept in under Jim’s bed and into the cabin, and

no sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white folks and knowed
In the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass
in there to get your breath.  By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to
I wisht dey’d lemme ‘lone, I does.”
I will!”

pewter spoon in Uncle Silas’s coat-pocket, and Aunt Sally wasn’t come
out of him the size of a warwhoop, and Tom he turned kinder blue around
new one. And it ‘ll be the third I’ve made in two years.  It just keeps


clo’sline yistiddy, but she done gone:  she ain’ dah no mo’ now.”
with her mouth open and her hands up; and as for me, I wished I was in
“Oh, for the land’s sake!  Give a body a rest!  Go ‘long now, the whole

And so he went on a-mumbling up stairs, and then we left.  He was a
‘m myself.”

galley-west; and she said cle’r out and let her have some peace, and if
and she didn’t _care_, and warn’t a-going to bullyrag the rest of her
couldn’t prop it up right, and she would always cave in.  But of course
wash-pan--afraid the solder would melt; but Uncle Silas he had a noble
ladder wouldn’t cramp him down to business I don’t know nothing what I’m

yer ole shirt, en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat.”
was one which he reckoned he’d decide on.  He says:
like all git-out.”

to scrabble on to the wall, they was all so good; but at last he allowed
tedious hard work and slow, and didn’t give my hands no show to get
over, and she come mighty near mashing us every time.  Tom said she was
quit on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the grindstone under


“Jim, don’t act so foolish.  A prisoner’s _got_ to have some kind of a
gwyne to _leave_, dat’s _shore_.”

“I ain’ got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o’ paper, en a juice-harp;



petting and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things, on top of
IN the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and
caterpillars, and one thing or another; and we like to got a hornet’s
generly landed in your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most
touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and she would jump
when there was, a body couldn’t sleep, it was so lively, and it was
going to die, but didn’t.  It was the most undigestible sawdust I ever
way, sometimes another.  But there’s always somebody spying around that
with us, and so after all our hard work and trouble this escape ‘ll go

“All right, I ain’t saying nothing; I’m the servant-girl.  Who’s Jim’s
So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter, and I smouched the yaller wench’s
time--so she was always a-whirling around sudden, and saying “ouch,” and
cutthroats from over in the Indian Territory going to steal your runaway

was going to start with the lunch, but says:


I reckoned she’d let me go now, and as a generl thing she would; but I
and putting them on, and scratching their heads, and changing their
sheep-signal; and here was Aunty pegging away at the questions, and

His eyes just blazed; and he says:
Here, I’ll lock some of you into the cabin, and you lay for ‘em in the
not breathing, and not making the least noise, and slipped stealthy

struck out, easy and comfortable, for the island where my raft was; and
When me and Jim heard that we didn’t feel so brash as what we did
minute, I says:
 He raised considerable row about it, but me and Jim stuck to it and
again. It’s the way they all do.”
not say nothing about it, nor let anybody know, because we wanted to
So he lit up his lantern, and got his saddle-bags, and we started.  But
all locked and chained; so he took my canoe, and said for me to wait

uneasy.”
said, come along, let Sid foot it home, or canoe it, when he got done
Damrell?--s’I, he’s crazy, s’I--them’s the very words I said.  You all
“The very words I was a-sayin’ no longer ago th’n this minute to Sister

“Why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-full o’ niggers in there
Silas and my Sid and Tom on the constant watch day _and_ night, as I was
“Laws alive, I never--”
asleep, ‘way up stairs in that lonesome room, and I declare to goodness
locked, and we wanted to see the fun, so we went down the lightning-rod,
I see my chance; so I skips up and says:
keep a light burning so he could see it.

and her old gray head was resting on her hand, and she was asleep.

doctor; and Jim, in _her_ calico dress, with his hands tied behind him;
I followed the men to see what they was going to do with Jim; and the
know me, and they took him to the same cabin, and put his own clothes
me to leave to go and get help; and he got a little worse and a little
and was all tired out, too, and I see plain enough he’d been worked

heavy, or could have meat and greens with his bread and water; but they
would wash. But he was sleeping, and sleeping very peaceful, too; and

nigger free--me and Tom.”
inscriptions, and one thing or another, and you can’t think _half_ the
went for the most noise, and we got our canoe, and made for the
says:
 They’ve got him back, safe and sound, and he’s in that cabin again,
Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed she ever was going to
cried over her, and I found a good enough place for me under the bed,
bed, Huck Finn.”
I knowed he wouldn’t mind, because it would be nuts for him, being
way without anybody to watch him.  So now I got to go and trapse all

wrote another one to tell you I was coming; and I s’pose he--”
right and he managed to set a nigger free that was already free before?
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so good,
none from home, because it’s likely pap’s been back before now, and got
“Nemmine why, Huck--but he ain’t comin’ back no mo.”
and sivilize me, and I can’t stand it.  I been there before.
hundred years and more, the fathers transmitting it to the sons and so
for him, and prayed God for him, that, now that he was really come, the

criss-cross beams, with solid material between, coated with plaster.
into a general pile, mornings, and selections made from the mass at
but they were afraid of the jeers of their friends, who could not have
treason and soundly beaten for it by her husband.
unmercifully that he was glad to keep his dream to himself after that.
poor Anne Askew and three men burned at the stake in Smithfield, and
their perplexities to Tom for solution, and were often astonished at the
in his dreams.
to observe his forlorn condition and not be moved--after their fashion;
And when he awoke in the morning and looked upon the wretchedness
himself at Temple Bar, the farthest from home he had ever travelled in
masonry, the wide-spreading wings, the frowning bastions and turrets,
Poor little Tom, in his rags, approached, and was moving slowly and
to one desire:  that was to get close to the prince, and have a good,
You should have seen that fickle crowd snatch off their hats then.
they stopped stock still where they were, like so many statues.  Edward

drink; but when she hath her judgment clear again, she maketh it up to
“True, indeed.  I had not thought of that.  I will consider of her

“None, sir.  Would’st have them take off their garment, and sleep
Andrew taught me, of his kindness, from his books.”
a farthing--albeit ‘tis main hard to get the farthing, please your

in raiment like to thine, and strip my feet, and revel in the mud once,
side before a great mirror, and lo, a miracle: there did not seem to
this a bruise upon your hand?”
“Open!  Unbar the gates!”


undergoing elaborate repairs.  The prince took heart at once--he felt
scanty dimensions, neither was it ornamental; from beneath it the hair
“Marry, art thou his grace’s messenger, beggar?”
This was vastly enjoyed, as the laughter testified.  The youth who had

name; if I can but find it before my strength is wholly spent and I
massed together.
father, as thou shalt soon have cause to--”

across his breast, as he had seen a noble knight do, by way of salute to
Suppose some one should come, and catch him in the prince’s clothes, and
silken page said--

story to story, from saloon to saloon, “The prince hath gone mad, the
Soon there was a general buzz along the corridors, of “The prince! See,
but old, and slightly frayed in places.  One of his swollen legs had a

head against his breast, and patted it tenderly.  Presently he said--
therein nothing blameful.  I am but young to die, and thou canst save me
“Go?  Surely, if thou desirest.  But why not tarry yet a little? Whither
“Perchance he is but mad upon this one strain, and hath his wits

“Trouble me not--it is nothing but a scurvy faintness.  Raise me! There,
. . . Give me to drink--I burn:  this sorrow sappeth my strength. . . .
free of treasonable taint to invest him with his honours? No, by the
die, and--”
people, and come again when my body is refreshed.”
eyes fixed on him reproachfully.


make, he shall show nought of unrest to the curious that look on, but
Lord Hertford said--

“Please you, sir, keep diligently in mind his majesty’s desire. Remember
by chance, had the same happy effect.  Once the little Lady Jane turned
Tom was to study no more at present, whereupon her little ladyship
He stopped, blushed, then continued low and sadly: “Ah, my malady
changed the talk to other matters.
alert constantly, and found their office no child’s play. Wherefore,
“Have we leave of the prince’s grace my brother to go?”
“May it please your lordships to grant me leave to go into some corner
Next the tired captive sat down and was going to take off his buskins,



his head was made of Spanish glass; and, sooth to say, he suffered none
there can be two, not of one blood and birth, so marvellously twinned?
CHAPTER VII. Tom’s first royal dinner.
Taster to his highness the Prince of Wales was there also, prepared to
All those that were present had been well drilled within the hour to
word or protest of any sort.
lords about him, and tears came into his eyes.  They sprang forward with
twitching nose was pleading more urgently than ever for relief.  At last
This new eccentricity of the prince’s ruined mind made all the hearts
gauntlets, the plumed helmet, and such other pieces as he could don


“Alack, how have I longed for this sweet hour! and lo, too late it
the Duke of Norfolk’s warrant.”
“True, most true!” interrupted the King.  “Fetch it!  Go:  time flieth!”
“Trouble him no more, poor child.  The hand of God lieth heavy upon him,


Presently a command was given, and immediately all living creatures
state barge was towed by a tender.  Besides the rowers, these tenders
trumpets resounded from within.  A lively prelude arose from the
hauts-de-chausses, and took their way down the steps.  They were of the
burst into a mighty roar of welcome; and Tom Canty, the cause and hero

His cudgel crashed down upon the meddler’s head:  there was a groan, a
them:  then let thy hand be heavy as thou wilt.  Stand forth, lad.  Now
sisters was different.  Their dread of bodily injury gave way at once to

The woman sank back to a sitting posture on the floor, and, covering her
empty home again.”
sent him staggering into goodwife Canty’s arms, who clasped him to her


contrive that test.  But it was an easier thing to propose than to
his dreams or out of his thinkings, but he hath cast his hand before his
again; then she crept apart and communed miserably with herself upon
The poor mother’s interruptions having ceased, and the Prince’s pains
with--”
“Alas! it was no dream, then!”
A voice answered--
hurried him along the dark way, giving him this caution in a low voice--
dancing, and shouting people, massed together on the river frontage.
liquor, found himself rudely shoved by Canty in his efforts to plough
Other revellers were interested by this time.  They cried out--
He very soon realised this fact, and straightway busied himself about

little friends at his side, the Princess Elizabeth and the Lady Jane
the great hall, preceded by heralds making proclamation, and by the Mace
him--and drank from a portly golden loving-cup with the Princess
their heads; either of them having an hatchet in their hands, and boots
which the whirling turmoil of gaudy figures below him presented, the

the camp.  The speech of this fantastic figure was received with an


“Answer me truly, on thy faith and honour!  Uttered I here a command,
prodigious shout burst forth--
is dead!”  The tidings struck a chill to the heart of the poor little
quarters overhead, stretched along both sides of it, from one bank of
bridgy talk, and thought bridgy thoughts, and lied in a long, level,
Men born and reared upon the Bridge found life unendurably dull and
the door with his small friend, a rough voice said--
“‘Tis a lie!” cried the little King, hotly.
“If thou do but touch him, thou animated offal, I will spit thee like a
furniture in it, and was vaguely lighted by a couple of sickly candles.
he keep up the character.  Poor little friendless rat, doubtless his

seven years that I have heard nought from home in my foreign dungeon, he

“What’s amiss?”

“Lo, the poor thing’s madness is up with the time!  It hath changed
I must not go by halves, I must stick at nothing that belongeth to the
half-hour for want of a better.  My father, Sir Richard, is very rich,
though in truth he said it was herself he loved--but then ‘twas his way,
worst might work him profit were I swept out of the path--so--but ‘twere
and courage I won to the free air at last, and fled hither straight; and
out of the airy nothings wherewith it hath wrought this curious romaunt.
This fantastic suggestion startled Hendon out of his reverie.  He was
and therefore hath no merit; but since your Majesty is pleased to hold
cause was lost.  King John restored De Courcy’s titles and possessions,
“Rise, Sir Miles Hendon, Knight,” said the King, gravely--giving the
a pause: “Ah, what if he should call me by my fine title before
Hendon disapparelled the boy without dissent or remark, tucked him up in
“I have lodged worse for seven years; ‘twould be but ill gratitude to
clothing, of cheap material, and showing signs of wear; but tidy, and
thing to him, belike, since he has doubtless been used to foot it bare,
“The inn is paid--the breakfast that is to come, included--and there is
it admiringly--“they have a grandeur and a majesty that do cause
He stared about him in speechless astonishment for a moment; noticed for
straight, at the bridge-end on the Southwark side.  I brought him
“Thousand deaths!  ‘Twas done to deceive me--‘tis plain ‘twas done to
from some near place; and just as he was joining them--”
joint, the babe unborn is no whit more blameless than--”

wildest madcap dream that ever the spirits of night did conjure up to
sorrows.”
saying to himself, “Every night will I give my father a penny; he

upon his heavy loss, whilst the dressing proceeded.  In the beginning, a
consequently Tom grew very weary of the ceremony; so weary that he felt
Stole, the Head Ranger of Windsor Forest, the Second Gentleman of the
and was ready for the services of the Hairdresser-royal.  When he at
form, and yet not wholly a form, since there was no Protector as yet.
“‘Tis a strange folly.  Will he keep?”
the realm of England.”
nor brains nor hands to help itself withal.  I remember me of a small
Council, knowing his private wishes in that regard, had thought proper
the creature of a diseased mind; they would simply listen to his project
During the forenoon, Tom had an enjoyable hour, by permission of his

some frequency, now that business urgencies would often call Hertford

“The master, being wroth with what he termed such slovenly and doltish
“Then where is thy blame?  What riddle is this?  Am I in truth gone mad,
“And hast thou been beaten, poor friend, according to the promise?”
“Oh, thanks, my good lord!” cried the boy, dropping upon his knee again.
“My back is my bread, O my gracious liege! if it go idle, I starve.  An’
The grateful Humphrey responded fervidly--
resolved to draw instruction from this source daily; and to this end he
Then the Earl proceeded, very delicately, to instruct Tom as to the

them”--then he deftly turned the talk to other matters, with the purpose
his mouth from time to time, and tried hard to acquit himself
had done, but there was a lifting of his cloud in one way--he felt
Tom they were all insignificant compared with the ordeal of dining all

himself with a lively sense of satisfaction, “In truth, being a king is
Death--and a violent death--for these poor unfortunates!  The thought
page, in the most matter-of-course way, made a profound obeisance
door with manifestations of impatient expectancy; seeing which, the
sufficient.  He said to himself: “Now is the matter clear; this is the
The officer knelt, and answered--

“Odds my life, a strange _boon_!  Was it not the fate intended thee?”

The Earl’s face showed profound gratification, for he was a man of
sick--three witnesses say it was at ten of the clock in the morning, and
Weighty evidence, this, in that simple age.  Tom recognised its
This was an argument of tremendous force in that superstitious day.  Tom

which few there would have felt justified in either admitting or
sensations.
thing.  Still, he was not going to deny himself the pleasure of feeding
“Nay, not so, sire--they do deny it.”
“Suffered the woman also by the storm?”
individual murmured, “An’ the King be mad himself, according to report,
but not an Englishman--in this latter case the contract would be null

“Exert thy power--I would see a storm!”
or harmful, but indeed prefer the opposite--do this and thy life is
forfeit life were the price she got!  It is argument that other
out of thee.  Go thy way in peace; and if it return to thee at any time,

again, the other with a salt-cellar, a plate, and bread; when they have

besides, nobody can be very ungraceful in nicely-fitting beautiful
this regard”--but we will let the chronicler tell about it:--
down and did it for him.  He got through without a mistake--flawless and
Miles Hendon hurried along toward the Southwark end of the bridge,
naturally try to find that friend again, provided the effort did not
here--it was Hendon’s place to come to him, not his to go to Hendon.  He
with a small bit of rag tied to it, then led the way into the forest,
angrily--
provoke me, I must.  Thy prating doth no harm here, where there are
assaulted him, but Canty--or Hobbs, as he now called himself--prevented
suggested an ogre whose nostrils breathed destruction and whose hand
disagreeably, and he unmuffled his head to see whence this interruption
sore-faced babies; there were a couple of starveling curs, with strings
a rousing chorus.  By the time the last stanza was reached, the
course of it, it appeared that ‘John Hobbs’ was not altogether a new
chief, answered--
the eastward tramp; a fine lass, of nice ways and orderly conduct, none
years thoud’st never hear so masterful a cursing.  Alack, her art died
shiftless and hungry upon the world because their farms were taken from

the potter’s field, safe from all harms.  And the kids--well, whilst
“Thou shalt _not_!--and this day the end of that law is come!”
sharply--
swing for it.”

but choose some other title.”

“Trample not upon thy beseeching worms, O noble Majesty!”
indignantly spurned; whereupon he went about begging for a rag to paste

grew more and more cheerful, and finally began to chaff each other and
and his sons, kept them dodging all the time, and applauded uproariously
“I see nought to steal; it is a paltry place.  Wherefore we will beg.”
thou hast begged all thy days.  Mayhap he lied. Peradventure you will
lie, upon occasion, for the best of us do that; but there is no occasion
The King was about to reply contemptuously, when Hugo said,
sprawled before him, with a shriek, and began to writhe and wallow in
thy stricken brother to yon house, where--”
his shoulders and trust Providence for the rest.”
He wandered on, wounded and indignant, and was resolved to put himself
light--always far away, apparently--almost in another world; if he heard
and nobody stirring.  He got so cold, standing still, and the hospitable
blankets, with as good speed as the darkness would allow; gathered them
no sound.  He continued to listen, and wait, during what seemed a long

rope; followed up the rope and found an innocent calf!--for the rope was
that he was at last in the society of a fellow-creature that had at
of base and brutal outlaws; he was warm; he was sheltered; in a word, he

He got up and stepped out of the stall, and just then he heard the sound

The children gave a little start, and their eyes spread themselves wide
be. Now think on’t.  For all things that be not true, be lies--thou
was a mighty relief to him to pour out his troubles where they would not
for his forlorn condition and apparently crazed intellect touched her
surprise the boy into betraying his real secret.  She talked about
accomplished it.
Full of eagerness to prove her sagacity, she told the King to mind the
brisk and cordial tongue-lashing. Then, seeing how troubled he was
to the family level, instead of requiring the woman and her children to
cleaning of wooden spoons and trenchers had seemed an easy thing to do.
of kittens to drown, he did resign.  At least he was just going to
CHAPTER XX. The Prince and the hermit.
interrupted.
approached it warily, stopping often to look about him and listen.  It


shalt be at peace here.  None shall find out thy refuge to disquiet thee
muttering, he approached the King and said impressively--
“I see you feel my atmosphere!  There’s awe in your face!  None may
ah, yes, I was to be pope!--and I _should_ have been pope, for Heaven
supper--chatting pleasantly all the time, and occasionally stroking the
“Thou art King?”

still muttering, mumbling, ejaculating.  The winds sighed around the
eternal fires!  Yes, down into the eternal fires!  He escaped us--but it
tranquil breathing showed that his sleep was sound once more.
to despair, the boy crossed his hands himself, and the next moment
heedless of the drift of time, and softly whetted his knife, and mumbled
a smothered sound through his closed jaws, which the hermit chose to
his face; but this piteous sight wrought no softening effect upon the
from the hermit’s hand; he cast a sheepskin over the boy and started up,
“Homage and greeting, reverend sir!  Where is the boy--_my_ boy?”
“How soon?  How soon?  Come, waste not the time--cannot I overtake him?
“It is a secret--mark thou reveal it not.  I am an archangel!”
last remark of his servant came as comes a reviving breath from fresh
“Ah, it came from without--I think from the copse yonder.  Come, I will

Then followed a confusion of kicks, cuffs, tramplings and plungings,
stood John Canty and Hugo!
sometimes the victim of small spitefulness at the hands of Canty and
But poor Hugo stood no chance whatever.  His frantic and lubberly
his meaner title being at the same time solemnly cancelled and annulled,
to beg; but the result was not encouraging--he declined to plead for the

piece of leather, which was then bound tightly upon the leg.  This would
continued until the poultice began to bite; and in no long time its work

purpose, and the other watching as sharply for a chance to dart away and


as he strode along.
“Marry, good souls, let us proceed gently, not with ill blood and

the _real_ kingdoms of this world.”
his throne again, can it ever grieve him to remember that when he was
by his ignorance.  The judge meditated, during an ominous pause, then
It was done.  None remained but the two officials, the accused, the

him. The woman made her grateful adieux and started away with her pig;
“Stands the wind in that quarter?  Thou wast under oath, and so swore
succeeded in closing his mouth again before he lost anything out of it.

laid his hand upon his arm, and said in a low voice--
man!”
The man was dumb with fear and distress, for a moment; then he rallied,
experienced in law, in jests, in--”

“Yes, it hath a name.  In the law this crime is called Non compos mentis

bones for his escape.”
Hendon wished to guard against over-fatiguing the boy; he judged that


gentle elevations and depressions, suggested the swelling and subsiding
tongue going all the time.  “Here is the church--covered with the same
mind it not; ‘twill soon seem otherwise; for when I say thou art my
But Hugh only drew back, after betraying a momentary surprise, and bent
“And whom dost thou imagine thyself to be?”
devour him from head to foot with his eyes, turning him this way and

“What letter?”

to walk the floor, muttering--
shall hear it from the sweetest lips in England.  I an impostor?  Why, I


They shook their heads; then the master said--
“He is armed, Sir Hugh, and we are weaponless.”
“Escape?  Spare thyself discomfort, an’ that is all that troubles thee.

himself, “Poor ruined mind--still busy with its pathetic dream.”
with matters which concern the weal of a nation and the integrity of a

find her; now that he is away, she will speak her true mind.  She will
she take the sense of old comradeship out of him, and transform him

can command one life-long friend to betray and disown another, and be
 Go--do not hesitate. If you lack money, take this purse, I beg of you,


some sort of order, and then his mind centred itself upon Edith.  He
come to the rescue.  The jailer restored peace by giving the man a sound
Hendon glanced up, and experienced a pleasant sensation for the first



the benefit of other hearers.
Sir Richard’s death, too--by a wicked forgery. Tales of cruelty to the
to busy thyself with matters that nearer concern thee than this
But the old man got no further--a warning sign from Hendon checked his
The King asked sharply--
Edward the Sixth--whom God preserve!  Yea, and a dear and gracious
Court had set up some sprig of the nobility in his place?  No, for his


is me!--for they were my comforters.”
prisoners entered it through a massive archway of masonry, and were
I, the very source of power in this broad realm, am helpless to protect
Now, by command, the masses parted and fell aside, and the King saw a
thrown flaming aside, she struggling all the while to free herself, and
his delusion will pass away and be forgotten, and his poor mind will be
a tradesman’s apprentice whose case particularly distressed the King;
it by the loss of his ears in the pillory, and degradation from the
statute books.  The world is made wrong; kings should go to school to
brothership with his prosecutor, and rightful heirship to the Hendon
delay, succeeded.  There sat his poor henchman in the degrading stocks,
“Give thyself no trouble as to the matter of minding him, good man, I
would take the stripes--a king might do that, but a king could not beg.
the lash was applied the poor little King turned away his face and
and degraded mob that was gathered there; and its gibes and hootings
gravity that it was all he could do to keep some sign of his inward
the living wall divided silently to let him pass, and as silently closed
released and ordered to quit the region and come back no more. His sword
the young King’s goodness and his generous championship of the wronged
jogging along in his wake, with his head bowed; for he, too, was deep
The whole journey was made without an adventure of importance. But it
festivities of the morrow--Coronation Day--were already beginning;
and murderers in a jail another, and called idiot and impostor by
at parting.

and commanded her to go to her closet, and beseech God to take away the
Tom’s poor mother and sisters travelled the same road out of his mind.
travel, and clothed in rags and shreds--his share of the results of the

projects above a cloud-rack.
privilege (which it still possesses in our day) of holding itself
In Fenchurch Street a ‘fair child, in costly apparel,’ stood on a stage
same pretentious fiction; and his pride swelled higher than ever.  Oh,
The chronicler says, ‘At the upper end of Gracechurch Street, before the

carpets, stuffs, and cloth-of-gold tapestried the streets--specimens
involuntary gesture, born of a forgotten episode, and perpetuated by
The procession moved on, and still on, through ever augmenting
“Largess, largess!”  The cry fell upon an unheeding ear.
new raptures poured from the throats of the waiting multitudes:  but the
people.”
are upon thee.”  Then he added with sharp annoyance, “Perdition catch

look and think at our leisure.  We have glimpses, here and there
Stillness reigns, the torches blink dully, the time drags heavily.

them, and their excitement will be a sore hindrance. Still, this may
breath, the glory that streams and flashes and palpitates about him is
years.  When all were finally seated, the spectacle from the galleries
thus heralded and welcomed, Tom Canty was conducted to the throne.
apparition intruded upon the scene--an apparition observed by none in


of wondering surprise.  This thing happened also to the other great
King’s apartments, and those of the Prince of Wales.
perilous to the State and to us all, to entertain so fateful a riddle as
vanished Great Seal--this forlorn little impostor had been taught his
corner remotest from the door that opens from the ante-chamber, you
“Why dost thou hesitate?  Hast not heard the King’s command?  Go!”
suspense and waiting--during which even the few faint hearts still


it to me, ye could have had it three weeks ago.  Right well I know where
seat him upon a throne--unfound, would leave him as he was, for good and
morning back again, every hap just as it happened.  We talked--I told
“For a jest, my prince, we did exchange garments.  Then we stood before
“Right, my King! right!” cried Tom Canty; “_Now_ the sceptre of England





What would the boy naturally do?  Where would he naturally go?

customer for a disease as for such clothes.
It was not at all cold; so he stretched himself on the ground in the lee
Toward eleven o’clock he approached the palace; and although a host of
generally will when somebody mesmerises him by gazing hard at him from
“Yes,” said the boy; and added, to himself, “within his grave.”

smiled when he recognised the ‘pot-hooks’ made by his lost little friend
knoweth.”
the hands of a gorgeous official, who received him with profound respect
in the full vigour of life, without having this peculiarly public
he the veritable Sovereign of England, and not the friendless poor Tom

Two persons, who, through delay, had only arrived from the country
Then his manners suddenly came back to him, and he dropped upon his
these living walls, preceded by an usher.  He knelt before the King, who
people that he hath been royal, in his time, and none shall deny him his
trustworthy promise that if she did not deny that he was Miles Hendon,
Tom Canty’s father was never heard of again.

memory and the springs of pity replenished in his heart.
Commonwealth fighting for the King, and the odd privilege ended with
law which he was bent upon amending was gentle enough for its purpose,

and their female companions.
waist is a red leathern girdle; a clerical band around the neck, and
dignity of Earl Marshal, and it was necessary to appoint another, who
The House of Peers, without examining the prisoner, without trial or
to have both hands of both drinkers employed, lest while the pledger

deserves great praise on account of the laws passed this session,

The Famous Stocking Case.
him.
From many descriptions of larceny the law expressly took away the

commandment that no time might be lost in proposing what was convenient,
Mayor.  By his side stands the Chancellor, holding the seals, and next
storey, which is 187 feet long, 51 feet wide, and 47 feet high; it is
bowing to the Governors being curiously formal.  This spectacle was

England, within the memory of men who are still hale in body and mind,

The question as to whether there is such a thing as divine right
to do next winter anyway.

speak of my nearest personal friends or enemies, or my most familiar
salaried cicerone:

   Anon withal came there upon him two great giants,
   manner of silk works for our meat, and we are all
   gentle-woman that lodged him with a good-will,
   for it were shame for me to see three knights
   of the knight suffered him for to do his will,
   choose whether ye will die or live, for an ye be
   then he espied that he had his armor and his
simple and natural way:
a body wanted--anything in the world, it didn’t make any difference


whereby I was to go with him and he was not to hurt me.  I came

He handed me his manuscript, and pointed out the place where


even seem to see her.  And she--she was no more startled at his

In the town were some substantial windowless houses of stone
then a parley from the walls, where men-at-arms, in hauberk and


very liver to know where I got my clothes.  As he started away he
laugh, in happy, thoughtless, boyish fashion, as we walked along,


be born for more than thirteen hundred years yet.”
whether this boy was telling me the truth or not.
of thirteen hundred years and upward.  I’m not a man to waste
in the due course of custom I would be flung into a dungeon and
Get word to my friends!  I thanked him; I couldn’t do less; and
those which children cut out of paper or create in gingerbread;
his hat a trifle just as he was beginning his remark.
dog stretched himself out comfortably with his bone between his


cause of offense whatever.  Many a time I had seen a couple of boys,
in some a certain loftiness and sweetness that rebuked your
as she in her good pleasure might elect; and this, as he said, he
was equal to the occasion.  He got up and played his hand like
Sir Launcelot rose quietly, and dressed him in Sir Kay’s armor and
as for me, I was perfectly amazed, that one man, all by himself,
in all the faces around--the look of dumb creatures who know that
his entrails out these many years ago to get at that tale and
themselves at home everywhere; and one of them sat up like a
So they rode till they came to a lake, the which was a fair water
Well, said the damsel, go ye into yonder barge and row yourself
battle with him, and be avenged on him.  Sir, ye shall not so,
Sir Pellinore; but Merlin had done such a craft that Pellinore saw

Sir Dinadan was so proud of his exploit that he could not keep
he scoffed; there wasn’t anything he wouldn’t scoff at. He said
by human hands.  However he had nullified the force of the
and was so little concerned about it that he stopped to yawn before
in their talk, and in the morals and conduct which such talk
mightily relieved, at last, when old Merlin swept the difficulty

But just then I heard the harsh music of rusty chains and bolts,
who never existed; and that I am talking to you, who are nothing
of escaping from this place!”
you tremble so?”
enough to essay to cross its lines with you!  Now God pity me,

“No--but for our blessed Lady’s sake, do it no more.”
“Don’t interrupt me.  He has died and come alive again thirteen
and I want him to be made to understand that I am just quietly
should have begged a boy like him to help me get out of this place;
perform them; suppose I should be called on for a sample?  Suppose

you to consider his perplexed case, as noting how the matter stands,
now!  And yet it is the very complexion of midnight, to a shade.
and noble a way as ever I did such a thing in my life: “Go back

a bound.  I said to myself that my eclipse would be sure to save me,
anything, it’s the compromise.  Well, if it is good, all right,

had slipped from some place of concealment and was pouring news
deceived, and glorifying God the next, that He was content to let
with such deep and loving gratitude that I had not the heart
without knowing it; the monk raised his hands above my head, and

a good breath; for I knew I was master of the situation now.
but banish this calamity, spare the sun!”
If this wasn’t the one I was after, how was I to tell whether this
The darkness was steadily growing, the people becoming more and
of it the king’s voice rose, saying:
“They are not meet,” the king broke in.  “Fetch raiment of another
It grew darker and darker and blacker and blacker, while I struggled
itself out, a moment or two later, the assemblage broke loose with
would soon reconcile me to my clothes; I was aware of that.  I was
and remember that in our house in East Hartford, all unpretending

but some more or less tame animals, and if I wanted to make life
to do it when his mercy was purchased, and he then dissolved
compensatingly agreeable to be so celebrated and such a center
to see _them_.  The pressure got to be pretty strong.  There was
By my authority as executive I threw Merlin into prison--the same
his mouth safe enough.  Clandestinely we made a few bushels of
powder, and ran wires from it to the other batches.  Everybody
a cloud for three weeks; things always happen so.  I kept secluded,

and get uncomfortable.  Then he began to mutter and make passes
crash and that old tower leaped into the sky in chunks, along
useful to work the weather, and attend to small matters like that,
To be vested with enormous authority is a fine thing; but to have
Look at the opportunities here for a man of knowledge, brains,
I had done my entire public a kindness in sparing the sun, and was
that that fact could not be dislodged or challenged for thirteen
king and Church and noble than a slave has to love and honor
necks; and the rest were slaves in fact, but without the name;
and examine.  I had mine, the king and his people had theirs.
which are far and away beyond their own powers; and they speak
There you see the hand of that awful power, the Roman Catholic
under oppression; and she introduced heritable ranks and
a disease has worked its way down to that level, it may fairly
have got a title easily enough, and that would have raised me
never known by any other designation afterward, whether in the
either.  I didn’t charge for my opinion about them, and they didn’t
community have at heart if he would be liked--especially as
more than a week, and as many as five hundred knights took part
better view; only sometimes one would dive into her handkerchief,
Agriculture, and ordered him to report it; for it was my purpose
the more details, the more swag: bearers, mutes, candles, prayers
  Then Sir Brian de les Isles and Grummore Grummorsum,
  spears to their hands.  Then came Sir Pertolope from
  seemed green, and another time, at his again coming,
  ready that I may just with thee.  Sir Gareth heard him,
  quarrel is here this day, and peradventure he is best
I sat in the private box set apart for me as the king’s minister.
then when he was leaving, some gray simpletons wrung him gratefully
Sir Gareth fetch him an awful welt, and I unconsciously out with
now and then.  It was a several years’ cruise.  They always put in
BEGINNINGS OF CIVILIZATION

schools in full blast in those places, and also a complete variety
the mightiest conceivable, and then when it by and by gets into
safe hands.  The despotism of heaven is the one absolutely perfect
a fact as any serene volcano, standing innocent with its smokeless
a little at this and that and the other superstition, and so prepare
him for journalism, for the time seemed about right for a start
to put up poles, for they would attract too much inquiry.  Ground
As for the general condition of the country, it was as it had been
the postponement I had asked for, four years before, had about
of both sexes.  Hardly a month went by without one of these tramps
they had been languishing in that cruel captivity for twenty-six
gratitude to the king for this splendid mark of his favor for me.
went for anything, she didn’t know as much as a lady’s watch.  I said:
“In the land of Moder, fair sir.”
the first time.”
the difference between your--_why_ do you look so innocent and idiotic!”

the direction of its place abideth not, but is some time under
a thousand pardons, I am not well to-day; pay no attention when
explanations; they fog a thing up so that you can’t tell anything
as welcome as a corpse is to a coroner.
“Ride with me?  Nonsense!”
then I said, “Never mind, now; I’ll tell you some time.”
_were_ good children--but just children, that is all.  And they
there is so much detail.  First you wrap a layer or two of blanket
down in front but is scolloped out behind so you can sit down,
head a conical steel casque that only came down to his ears, and
a sun-struck man to the drug store, and put you on, and help get
handkerchiefs or helmets.  And everybody we met, going down the hill

a dim fleck of white or gray on a wave-summit, which we knew was
the woods.  And by and by out we would swing again into the glare.
hang a man that would make a suit of armor without any pockets
the most real kind of misery.  I would not say it if it was not so.
his bandanna, he could keep his hardware, for all of me.
to hold it long at a time.
to change from nose to lip, and lip to ear, and buzz and buzz
but no matches.
and persuade the people to let the foolish fashion die out; but
talk, talk, talk, jabber, jabber, jabber; but just as good as she
Yes, it is strange how little a while at a time a person can be
as that on his flagstaff.  And yet there could not be anything more

to turn out and see what is going on, and this makes things worse

Sandy was loaded for a three-day stretch.
of the free population of the country were of just their class and
had told their fathers and themselves that this ironical state
gratis, and be ready to come at a moment’s notice, leaving their
there were taxes, and taxes, and taxes, and more taxes, and taxes
And here were these freemen assembled in the early morning to work
persons, the other upon a hundred millions; but our shudders are
There was something pitifully ludicrous about it.  I asked them
unhit--at first.  But presently one man looked up and asked me
its institutions or its office-holders.  The country is the real
Under that gospel, the citizen who thinks he sees that the
where nine hundred and ninety-four of the members furnished all
munching black bread with that abused and mistaught herd of human
“How--a priest?  Didn’t I tell you that no chattel of the Church,
matter.  I taught him myself.” The man’s face cleared.  “And it is

absolutely realize that a penny in Arthur’s land and a couple of
and me on our horse, I lit my pipe.  When the first blast of smoke
I lost some time, now, for these big children, their fears gone,
a remark which she had begun that morning, with the cry:
play.  No, they came in a body, they came with a whirr and a rush,
and we must ride for life.  No, she wouldn’t.  She said that my
will venture it, let the idle say what the idle will.  And, la,
ye would not hold them blamable. They fear to come.”
put up with anything she might require.  So she swore them to appear
them off.  How many of them are there, Sandy?”
withal.  I will repeat it anon and anon in mine idlesse, whereby
started.  Tell me about the knights.”
he let her monotony drip on him right along all day.
ware how there hung a white shield on that tree, and ever as the
they don’t have them here; one often speaks sharply to them when
There is a knight in this country that owneth this white shield,
of the Court in another twenty-four.  The fact is, it is just
any is on live.”
the turret as they were wild, so that some of them fell by the way.
and support it.”
the vocabulary is too limited, and so, by consequence, descriptions
figure up results, you can’t tell one fight from another, nor who
the might of their horses, that either knight smote other so hard
fro it passed nine of the clock, waxed by the space of three hours
--“and waxed past noon and drew toward evensong.  Sir Gawaine’s

When I came to myself again and began to listen, I perceived that
make him say, ‘In this country, be jabers, came never knight since
“Celluloid teeth, nine dollars a set, as like as not--the loose-fit
mornings, out of sweet dreams of her, and say “Hello, Central!”


thing to do.  So I was pleased when I saw in the distance a horseman
started a number of these people out--the bravest knights I could
any way or with any weapon that promised to hurt it.  Why, in my
he was to stop at no experiment, however desperate, that could
and running night and day; and the atmospheric result was getting
King Arthur, and wife of King Uriens, monarch of a realm about
Wherefore I said:

conqueror, but Maledisant didn’t do it; and also persisted afterward
malice.  All her history was black with crime; and among her crimes
conspicuous personality here; she was head chief of this household,
old king was wrung an involuntary “O-h!” of compassion.  The look


blandishments; but nevertheless she was not able to entirely cover up

Church.  More than once I had seen a noble who had gotten his
After prayers we had dinner in a great banqueting hall which was
centuries as “In the Sweet Bye and Bye.”  It was new, and ought
at the start--nothing was left but the semblance of a hoop-skirt;
chaplain any, he had his laugh with the rest; more than that, upon
conscious heads were bowed in reverent expectation of the coming
“Lay hands on her!  To the stake with her!”
Confound it, what a crazy contract to pledge a person to!  What if
to hang the composer without first consulting me.  I was very sorry
happy, her wine naturally began to assert itself again, and it got

sufferer and his crime.  He had been accused by an anonymous
loyal zeal and betrayed him to the forester.”
“As to that, we shall see, anon.  An I rack him to death and he
wrists and ankles tied to ropes which led over windlasses at either
her servants, but I must have my way; for I was King Arthur’s
wine given him to drink.  The woman crept near and looked on,
it of all but the family and myself.  Then I said:
The woman broke in, eagerly:

didn’t you before?”
“You _did_?  Oh, dear, this is the most mixed-up business that ever--”
“Well, then, why in the world _didn’t_ he confess?”

even the great majority, of these that were down on the ground
condition.  That wasn’t law; it wasn’t gospel: it was only
there were extenuating circumstances, and so in Arthur the king’s
everything; training is all there is _to_ a person.  We speak of
Sheol and welcome for all I care.
generous thing to pay for that lad, and that I ought in common
Some of those laws were too bad, altogether too bad.  A master
jokes, and have a good time; and some of the performances of the
to this: I have noticed my conscience for many years, and I know
me all the morning.  I could have mentioned it to the old king,
to examine her collection, her bric-a-brac--that is to say, her
years, and was eighteen when she entered.  She was a commoner,
same rock; they had passed nine pitch dark years within fifty feet
and took no further notice of us.  There were some pathetically

and left only one in captivity.  He was a lord, and had killed
prisoner’s crime was a mere remark which he had made.  He said
through the arrow-slit and see his own home off yonder in the
of his treasures; there must still be one remaining--one now
men and women, and some of them married and experimenting familywise
Consider it: among these forty-seven captives there were five
the five had seen daylight for thirty-five years: how much longer
more, nothing less.  Well, when we inherit property, it does not
shot over their heads.  The queen was just one of that sort, and


“Even so, fair my lord.”
was the duke already on horseback, clean armed, and his six sons
of their swords to the knight, and so he received them.  And then
“An I speak not sooth, let it be the worse for me.”

“Ah, peradventure my head being distraught by the manifold matters
as he has raised.  As I understand it, Sir Gawaine killed seven
Between six and nine we made ten miles, which was plenty for a
of sending Sir Launcelot down over his horse-tail once.  He was
He was aweary, he said, and indeed he looked it; but he would not
Sir Madok was very bitter, and brake out anew with cursings.  He
equipped with any remaining snag or remnant of a tooth.
was stagnant.  It seemed incredible that a man could outlast half
I have made room for it here, but on account of a thing which
a peaceful revolution in his mind.  For it could not help bringing
excitement increased every moment; and so did mine, for that sort

see again these gracious captives, and the sorrow deepened in their
true key, you are liable to err, and turn your hogs into dogs,

and rode down to the pigsty, and struck up a trade with the

no path; they broke out through the brush on all sides, and flowed
We got the hogs home just at dark--most of them.  The princess
insurrection in a gasometer.
curious delusion.  Here she was, as sane a person as the kingdom
be turned into a sty, and its occupants into hogs, would have been
The next morning Sandy assembled the swine in the dining-room and

“Come--you don’t even know these people?  Then who invited us here?”

To my mind, the situation was uncomfortable.  It might become more so.
and bewrayed by the beguilements of the great enemy of man, that
mustn’t talk now, we must act.  You want to be careful; you mustn’t
“I also am ready; I will go with thee.”

tell by the remains of each period what changes of diet the family
to remain unknown in England for nine hundred years yet.
Sandy knew the goal and purpose of this pilgrimage, and she posted
lived there an abbot and his monks.  Belike were none in the world
abbot unceasingly by beggings and beseechings that he would construct
tears, torturings of the flesh, all was vain to beguile that water

asylum midway of the valley between.”
with him when he began eagerly and awkwardly to lead up, in the
and girls, and three babies at the breast.  Even the children were
torn, and none walked without a limp.  Originally there had been a
the like of this coating upon furniture in unoccupied houses, and
jumped from his horse.  He stormed and swore at this girl, and
everyday familiarity with slavery to notice that there was anything
proprietor who had bought this girl a few miles back, deliverable
of him one might not bear at all, and so I turned away; but I knew
leather hat boxes, and every time he overcame a wandering knight
“I am pointed for that place myself.  Is there anything stirring
thereunto contributing, wherein the matter--”
The prayers that did begin then, and the lamentations in sackcloth
Breakfast was ready.  As soon as it was over I showed to Sir Ozana

swept it from end to end and noted its features.  That is, its
possessed the heart of every monk and published itself in his
connected with it.  I shall use no arts that come of the devil,
magician can touch it till he throws it up.”
The abbot’s face lighted.
even as I have done these ten long days, counterfeiting thus
myself; and I could not do that until I got my things from Camelot,
At last I ventured a story myself; and vast was the success of it.
cursed like a bishop--French bishop of the Regency days, I mean.

I had an idea that the well had sprung a leak; that some of the
bomb into it.  It was my idea to appoint Merlin.  However, it was
“How does the water usually stand in it?”
away, and no innocent of them all would ever have thought to drop
“Hotel?  I mind not to have heard--”
with the difficulty of this enterprise; he would fill up the others.
“The hermits, of course.”
to understand the simplest thing.”
can beget, and tongue that can deliver so great and mellow-sounding
fair to spring those nineteenth century technicalities upon the
the very attitude of reverence, and stood uncovered; and if words
him unmolested; it was another’s to lean against a rock, all day
noble and the renowned journeyed from the remotest lands on the globe
upward of eighteen thousand first-rate tow-linen shirts, which



was their way, and it rolled down over their dens in a dense and
none may utter and live, has laid his spell upon this well.  The
“That that spirit with the Russian name has put his spell
some chance--that is, some small, some trifling chance--of success.”
“Oh, none.  One may fail, of course; and one may also succeed.

But I kept him in the weather bureau right along, to undermine
the stoning up of a well to the constructing of a mathematical
enough to reach to the door of the chapel and project beyond
purple on the last--and grounded a wire in each.
to the platform, and hid the batteries there.  We put a rope fence
heat.  They gave notice that the abbot and his official suite would
and then it solidified itself, and you could have walked upon
“Constantinopolitanischerdudelsackspfeifenmachersgesellschafft!”
--and turned on the red fire!  You should have heard that Atlantic
vast clouds of radiant smoke aloft, and spreading a blinding
my announcement to those who couldn’t hear, and so convey it
and plain in the uncanny glare, they saw the freed water leaping
like a landslide when I pronounced that fearful name, and had
and set them to work, for it was plain that a good part of the

“One needs not to ask that of a poor body who has not known that
granted out of a grateful heart--but this, oh, this!  Would you
“You promise this?--you promise it?  Say the word--say you promise it!”
and shaky, leaving the whole black community above troubled and
up toward health and strength again; so I gained fast.
and had climbed the ridge which bordered the northern extremity
“Hello Central!  Is this you, Camelot?--Behold, thou mayst glad
“How long has this office been established here, Ulfius?”
“Well, this is the Valley of Holiness.”

interchanges, and some account of my late illness, I said:
that holp you with your miracle will be his guide and lead the way,

“There’s something wrong, Clarence.”
communication with distant regions, I was breathing the breath
hall, observing with childish wonder and faith the performances
of hands made eloquent answer--this reverend crowd _would_ like to
he told them what the Sultan of Egypt was at; also what the King
“It will be difficult--perhaps impossible.”


doings of a subject interest me not.”

is not sleeping, the king rides.”
That jab made this fellow squirm.  The abbot inquired after the
“And where will they be the day after to-morrow at vespers?”
Next day I went up to the telephone office and found that the king
value, and yet here they were, ready to take up with an adventurer
--and he was on a rail, too, by the abbot’s order; and his reputation
a fashion of the time.  The Commission charged with the examination
whether he suspected it or not.  It was impossible that this should
the fault of his training, his natural and unalterable sympathies.
particular right here involved was not transferable, but must be
elected sheriff, refused to serve.  Then they went to work and
notice, as in duty bound, to her feudal lord and proper master
old.  Poor young creatures!  They had lived these three months
for a republic, because they had been debased so long by monarchy;
was; whether high or low, the bulk of its ability was in the long
that nobody could answer to but my West Pointers.  That ought
The head of it was the officer known to later centuries as Norroy

examined.  The king was willing, but the Board, who were all
nothing, too--all about eclipses, and comets, and solstices, and
“Get up and brush himself.”
“Can you write?”


whilst that I lay sick about the beginning of the year and thereby
contribute uninvited emendations of your grammar and punctuation.

“We had none, worshipful sir, the line failing before it had
without that qualification.”
case a man lies dead-alive four generations--mummified in ignorance
lineage would turn their backs and scorn to take them.  I were

character, insomuch that in these regards was she peer of the

own hook and in its own way, and go whither it would and come
When I noticed that, it gave me a valuable notion.  I thought
with the nation; but no, he wouldn’t hear of such a thing.  He had
These princes of the blood should range in rank from Lieutenant-General
join was equally certain.  Within sixty days that quaint and
go along--it was the prettiest idea he had run across for many
meddled in these matters, they weren’t my affair, but I did hate
sick people present.  The work was slow; it lacked the interest
surplus.  So I had privately concluded to touch the treasury itself
the devices upon them were as illegible as blisters, and looked
if he were a man.  If you take a nation of 60,000,000, where average
Thus, by the substitution of nickels for gold on a king’s-evil
along to the king.  A priest pronounced the words, “They shall
but when I went there and saw them I had to succumb.  I saw the
but there was no occasion for this diffidence: they could have
in all that throng who knew the meaning of this mighty birth, and



   Sir Launcelot met up with old King
   This is no pic-nic, these boys mean
   the Giant of the Knotted Bludgeon last
   to make the ey of the recipients hu-
   lying smithies. See his ad.
this excites you, and you drain the whole column, with a good

questions: What is this curious thing?  What is it for?  Is it a
in every minute detail--they can’t be told apart.”  Then they all
“Ah-h-h!”  “How true!”  “Amazing, amazing!”  “These be the very
of the universe vanish out of their consciousness and be as if it

longer the comeliest man in his kingdom, but one of the unhandsomest

I found the water some three hundred yards away, and had been
“Is that a marvel?  Let them come.”
as humble as the leaning tower at Pisa.  It is the most you could
I will take note and learn, and do the best I may.”
novitiate it would be in small inns and on the road; so to these
“We have escaped divers dangers by wit--thy wit--but I have

“Sire, I have been misunderstood.  I will explain.  There are two
“He would not claim more, I think.”
“What?  Canst thou truly look beyond even so vast a stretch
in practice; but I seldom exercise any but the long kind, because
“How amazing that it should be so!”

Every day a knight-errant or so came along, and the sight of them
then I got softly and carefully up and unstrapped my knapsack.
no attention to the king at all; it was his place to look out
then, frantic with rage, they stood up their horses on their hind
for the king joined the audience, of course, as soon as he had got
had a good subject, and that would be inconvenient, because I
and said:
approved subject and a satisfaction to his masters, or the very
on the thing....  Now, then--your head’s right, speed’s right,
stately gait, a region not liable to interruption, only one field

“Ah--so.  Then peradventure I should call him goodman.”
The king looked puzzled--he wasn’t a very heavy weight, intellectually.
bring nothing outside; we will go in--in among the dirt, and

nothing in the world to him, I might just as well have whistled.
and is its own highest reward.  The poorest paid architect,
CHAPTER XXIX
at such a time.  The king knocked.  We waited.  No answer.  Knocked

“Give yourself no trouble about me; I don’t care anything for the
lips, and as she gripped it with her eager talons the shutter came

and bring me news of what ye find?  Be not afraid to report,
“Is he asleep?”
insult him more.  He is in heaven now, and happy; or if not there,

would not be a mailed king killing a giant or a dragon, like the
that cruel hurt.  For look you--what is left to live for?  Her
softly stroking her face and hair, and kissing her and calling her
nothing to come between her and the release of death.  Then I slipped
“But it was his right,” interrupted the king.
the harvest, so also was ours; when his bell rang to call us to
humility under the chastening hand of God.  He carried my trespass
She gave a sharp quick glance at her eldest daughter, then cried
beasts, lepers, and no soul that valued its hope of eternal life
“True.  But man or beast, it will be wise to stay here a minute

bear it; I wanted to drive it out of my mind; so I struck into the
suspicion doth confirm it, you having the same fear.”
born so, educated so, his veins were full of ancestral blood that

poor arguments when they come glibly from a superstition-monger,
more distinct all the time.  The coming storm threatening more and
I told the king we must cut him down.  The king at once objected.

wood.  From this hiding-place we saw both men and women hunted
king broke in:



“Then you mean that nobody _did_ unlock them?”
I answered the questions myself, and narrowly watched the effects
to side with the master and fight his battle for him, without ever
slavery, and did also finally shoulder their muskets and pour out
“An ye prattle here all the day, justice will miscarry.  Think ye
the man pulled his resolution together, and began the march with

He looked pleased; pleased, and touched with apprehension at the
If I had my way, all his kind should have the same luck.”
ones that have ever tasted good in my mouth, and the reward of
member of it bound out to some useful trade, universal suffrage
meantime I had an auxiliary interest which had never paled yet,
old.  They implored help, but they were so beside themselves that
the afternoon.  A man who hasn’t had much experience, and doesn’t
power than the other had.
I went right on and furnished them a lot of information voluntarily;
would wonder how a small farmer happened to be carrying so much
hand over fist, and was vastly respected.  Marco was very proud of
there, too, the coal-dust on his face turned to chalk, and he lost

most generous way; Jones was remarking upon it to-day, just before
--but never mind about that--you’d never believe it anyway.”
been liberal in inventing wordy gratitude for the king, it would
Consider the vastness of the sum--”
he’s old Grayback from Wayback; but between you and me privately
down to fish and pinchbeck jewelry.  I concluded I would bunch
by Saturday evening, and send me the bill at dinner-time Sunday.
got that, not the government.  We furnished them for nothing.
sure Jones and I were ruined past help, and they blamed themselves
delirium--was so fresh and novel and inspiring that the sight of it
stand at that, and not elaborate it any.  Because he was just the
half-fed condition; how his faithful endeavors finally attracted

“Two times in every month there is fresh meat upon my table.”
“I can testify it--and I do,” said the wheelwright.

let go of it as willingly as a lady lets go of a fish; all of which
Sensation again--with awed murmurs.  Again she brought two
From this out, the madam piled up the surprises with a rush that
give us the items.”
   1 ham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   800
“Is that all?” I asked, in a voice of the most perfect calmness.
to save themselves, and there was a deep and general ejaculation of:
one of the dollars as security, until he could go to town and

meat twice a month, and his salt meat twice a week, and his white

in intellect, worth, and character, and I bankrupt in all three.
prosperous in this little tributary kingdom--whose lord was
The smith’s face beamed with joy.  He said:
And his face shone upon the company like a sunburst.  But I didn’t


those noble high wages of yours?--I seem to have knocked the
Well, I was stunned; partly with this unlooked-for stupidity on
--that’s the idea.  While it is true that with you a good mechanic

understand it.  For instance, it takes your woman 42 days to earn

“The lot will cost him 32 cents.  It takes him 32 working days
any consequence to them whether the high wages would buy anything
firmament for centuries, sitting here apparently defeated in
at all; and by and by, all in a flash, he’s flat on his back, and
the wages of to-day.  We know what the wages were a hundred years
allowed 3 cents a day, and mechanics 6.”
“Riches!--of a truth, yes, riches!” muttered Marco, his breath

the magistrate.  Ye may say, in general terms, it is the magistrate
lowly brother to take what they choose to give.  Thirteen hundred
And he will be strong and able, then.”

“Well, I’ll tell you why.  Is a man ever put in the pillory for
usually happens when a poor fellow is put in the pillory for some
“Well, then, suppose he has a few personal enemies in that mob
the stocks, can’t he?”

mechanic’s wage at one cent a day, for instance.  The law says that
A fine effect.  In fact, as fine as any I ever produced, with so
But no; you see I was an unknown person, among a cruelly oppressed
and while these poor fellows could have a chance to come to life
shot represented milrays, the larger ones mills.  So the gun was
detect a complacent something in the king’s eye which seemed to
summoned by the danger-signal and swarming to the rescue from


off his feet and stretched him flat on his back.  “St. George for
Well, while they were gradually playing out, it suddenly occurred
We tore along at a good gait, and soon left the sounds far behind
worth while to try.  We tried it, and made a success of it, though
somebody’s pasture to use for a few hours, we shall be safe enough.”


one?  And that is what he did.  He went for the wrong tree, which
was limitless.  He said that if nothing occurred to mar the prospect
interrupted.  Before the stones had been raging through the leaves
his dead according to his own fashion and taste.”
inspected us critically, then said sharply to the peasants:

distance, and soon the horsemen began to straggle back.  Meantime
his supper, and we saw no more of him.  At dawn in the morning
was a very great personage in his own region, which lay a day’s
steps away, in fulsome laudation of “our glorious British liberties!”
_Slaves!_  The word had a new sound--and how unspeakably awful!  The

tones of business, not of sentiment:
unwarrantably inconvenience your master--”
they were freemen had been sold into lifelong slavery without
the earl had had wit enough to--
than there is about a tramp, after all.  He is just a cheap and
the obscurest; from the grandest vocation among men to the basest.
like a fair market he would have fetched twenty-five dollars,
said plainly: “if that thing could be tried over again now, with
to work to take the style out of his sacred majesty.  I could have
can’t.  This man found that from his first effort down to his
Would he abolish slavery?
deal of both.  One could invent quicker ways, and fully as sure
By this time two of our feebler men and three of our women were
Well, now, what do you suppose our master did?  When we closed
And such a procession!  All the riffraff of the kingdom seemed
society.  Our master secured a good place for us near the gallows.
that his fellows may be few.  A law sends this poor young thing
and sent to sea.  The wife knew nothing of it.  She sought him
with hunger all acts, criminal or other, swam meaningless through
ashes; and when the awful words came, he cried out, ‘Oh, poor
with tears, and half moaning, half shrieking all the while, and the


broke my heart was something which happened in front of our old
assume possession of the property, march to Camelot, and--
because of his grand physique, but his kingly style was against
to be sad again.  For when the purchase was about to fail, as usual,

him, and early in the morning we will march out of this town,
over and wake some more of the gang.

fell across my back, as a reminder, and I knew what it meant.
CHAPTER XXXVII
dark at the Tabard inn in the village on the other side of the
a nobleman after a different fashion another time.  Go!”
the door, and workmen, assisted by the police, were thinning a
the master discovered his loss, he was mad with despair, and threw
“Why, I don’t see how they could determine which were the guilty

up a back street, I got a rough rig suitable for a common seaman
matters as--”
“Never mind Clarence who.  Say you want Clarence; you’ll get
here as slaves.  We should not be able to prove our identity
send them on the jump.  Let them enter by the southwest gate, and
was in good condition, and no snow or mud, they would probably
wouldn’t do to run and jump into it.  No, I must work up to it
there and look for the escaped slave, who was believed to be in
pick out a picturesque one; it is the crying defect of my character.
handcuffs.  If I had known it was a cul de sac--however, there

The witty officer lifted at his left ear with his thumb, made

the nation--the only nation on earth standing ready to blossom
multitude was prodigious and far-reaching; and yet we fifteen
to hear them break into a vast roar of laughter.  It wounded his
“Doubtless this sailor-man is his minister--observe his costly
Then a slave was blindfolded; the hangman unslung his rope.  There
I missed the king!  They were blindfolding him!  I was paralyzed;


damp from the press, by my plate at the breakfast table.  I turned
   next succeeding month. The battle
   good enterrainment. The box-office
   broad begevolence stretches out its help-
   N.B. This is the first tournament
so to speak, but a duel between two mighty magicians; a duel not
knights could accomplish nothing; against him no known enchantments

chance.  If I won my fight with Sir Sagramor, others would have
almost dragged the ground--oh, a most noble picture.  A great
gracefully pirouetting down the lists, and we tripped lightly up
and I went whistling through the air like an arrow to meet him
it fetched such a whirlwind of applause that Sir Sagramor lost his
the great loop of my lasso in wide circles about my head; the


known to chivalry, the Knights of the Table Round, the most
will venture against me--knight-errantry is dead.”  Now imagine my
it, because of the influence of the veil, know that it is no cumbrous
“No, sire, I brought only the one.”
have mine.”
Merlin broke in, rubbing his hands and smiling his lowdownest
excited that they shouted to me:
no hurt upon his body, nothing like a wound.  There was a hole
“If there are any who doubt that this field is well and fairly won,
to put on a bold face and play your hand for a hundred times what
lost now could knock out my last chance.  But I didn’t lose it.



their way into favor.  We had a steamboat or two on the Thames,
wouldn’t lay aside their armor, and they would “knock down” fare
longed-for point.  You see, I had two schemes in my head which
as well confess, though I do feel ashamed when I think of it:
to get up shindies with other royal cats, they would be laughably
a deeper love and reverence than the customary human king, and
but he was too feather-headed to know it, or care anything about
In two minutes I was kneeling by the child’s crib, and Sandy was
This little chap had lived in my arms a good part of its small life,
for him; bulls and bears might fight it out their own way for all
and told us to smoke as much as we pleased, it couldn’t get under
the ranks of admiring men-at-arms and menials, and so disappeared.

team who wasn’t a sceptered sovereign.  As for material of this
I had to discontinue that.  These people were no easier to please
   KING MARSIL.                KING MORGANORE.

outside of London, and had straightway resumed her old place at
In my dreams, along at first, I still wandered thirteen centuries
world; but it would have been cruel to confess it and spoil her
she was surprised, and not pleased; but I told her I had given
Why, we were back in this world in one instant!  Then we looked
begin to explain.  Had there been an invasion? an earthquake?
salt water all to myself.  There were ships in the harbor, at
I asked no questions; I didn’t need to ask any.  The Church had
and the Tuesday differed in no way from the Sunday.  I arrived


“I reckon you will grant that during some years there has been
ripe for manipulation in the stock-market.  It was wildcat, and

it sufficiently uncomfortable for the ambushed witnesses--to wit,

Sir Perimones, and--whom do you think?”
latest breath.  You can catch the agony in the queen’s face through
thence, and make swift preparation, and look to be soon attacked.
Arthur’s life, and the whole kingdom afterward.”
adder with his sword.  Inside of half a minute those two prodigious

   traitor that all this woe hath wrought.  Sir, let
   said Sir Bedivere.  Then the king gat his spear
   the noble Arthur fell in a swoon to the earth,

alive, and as soon as you are discovered we shall have business
“I certainly did think it.”
I’ll tell you what I’ve done, and what moved me to it.  Smart as




the other end of it goes to.  We laid it under ground, of course, and
“Oh, I remember--the time the Church tried her strength against
“Right; go on.”

“Of course!  I don’t know how I overlooked that.  It’s not only
“I’ve got a wire fence there, and a gatling.  They won’t drop any

didn’t really come to test the torpedoes; that was merely an incident.”
We sat silent awhile, thinking.  Then my mind was made up, and

   “BE IT KNOWN UNTO ALL.  Whereas the king having died
   and by their votes elect representatives and deliver
pleasant old palace, this is; I wonder if we shall ever again
had confidence in my word.  They would clear out without waiting
were here in the cave, instead of only your photographs, what
Crusaders, this being the Church’s war.  All the nobilities, big
in the “righteous cause,” and glorifying it, praying for it,
ever more sharply realizing itself to their imaginations, until
to put reason before sentiment, duty before love; our minds

None but nobles and gentry are knights, and _none but these_ will

Nearer and nearer it came, and more and more sublimely imposing
a thunder-crash, and became a whirling tempest of rags and fragments;
see over the wall of smoke, and we couldn’t see through it.  But
others--there always is, after an episode like that.  But there
   planets shall continue to move in their orbits, the
numbers engaged.  We are done with the nation; henceforth we deal
were to relieve each other every two hours.  In ten hours the
“I think you are right,” said he; “it is the obvious thing for
my conscience, I framed this message to the knights:
   families, do not reject the gift.  We offer you

platform to the cave, and made sure that they were all right;
and lay there on the slant of the muck to watch.  But it was
approached--from toward the north.  Presently, I heard it at my
satisfactory there--nobody awake but the working-watch.  I woke
inhospitable?”

a man!--leaning on the fence.”
where we were.  We made out another knight vaguely; he was coming
they carried the sword ready in the hand, and put it forward and
dead men were lying outside the second fence--not plainly visible,
a breastwork, of corpses, you may say.  One terrible thing about
Land, what a sight!  We were enclosed in three walls of dead men!
A glance showed that the rest of the enemy--perhaps ten thousand
thousand.  They halted, they stood their ground a moment against

to him, the man recognized him and stabbed him.  That knight was
We were glad to have this woman, for we were short handed.  We
The woman ceased from her mysterious foolery, and started tip-toeing
the corpse turns to dust.

ejaculations went on.  I spoke--merely a word, to call his attention.
myself a moment, and I thought you were gone....  Have I been
to me, all that could make life worth the living!  It was awful
battlements!--turn out the--”
profundity, and that impressive incomprehensibility which are so proper
Daily Alta California, of San Francisco, the proprietors of that journal
chatted about in the newspapers everywhere in America and discussed at
shark, the whale, and other strange monsters of the deep; and at night
program of the excursion without longing to make one of the party?  I will
     reason to believe that this company can be easily made up in this
       A day or two will be spent here in looking over the wonderful
       From Marseilles to Genoa is a run of one night.  The excursionists
     Florence, the most remote, being distant by rail about sixty miles.
     city of Sicily, which will be reached in one night from Naples.  A
     Marmora, and the mouth of the Golden Horn, and arriving in about
       From Smyrna towards the Holy Land the course will lay through the
     of Caesar’s Palace, Pompey’s Pillar, Cleopatra’s Needle, the
     along the coast of Spain.  Alicant, Carthagena, Palos, and Malaga
       A call will be made at Bermuda, which lies directly in this route
     substituted.
       Applications for passage must be approved by the committee before
      CHAS.  C.  DUNCAN,  117 WALL STREET, NEW YORK  R.  R.  G******,
     commending the party to courtesies abroad.
examination into my character by that bowelless committee, but I referred
Egypt, and substantial clothing to use in rough pilgrimizing in the Holy
 deserted, and lo, we had never a celebrity left!
CHAPTER II.
in one awful blast!  I had carefully prepared myself to take rather a
Ah, if I had only known then that he was only a common mortal, and that
excursion.  He was confiding, good-natured, unsophisticated,
“Not going to Paris!  Not g---- well, then, where in the nation are you
I was introduced to the young gentleman who was to be my roommate, and
A little after noon on that distinguished Saturday I reached the ship and
scampering ashore of visitors-a revolution of the wheels, and we were
ancient form departed, and we were alone on the deep.  On deep five
premonitions of the future.
I was up early that Sabbath morning and was early to breakfast.  I felt a
there never was such gladness in the air before, such brightness in the
and see the bow climbing high away among the clouds!  One’s safest course
away and fell over the coop of a skylight.
“Oh, my!”
breezy foretop is pleasant when one is not afraid to go up there; but
ship in the distance.
“Now, say--my friend--don’t you know any better than to be whittling the

Do you--now I ask you as a man and a brother--do you think I could

At seven bells the first gong rang; at eight there was breakfast, for
that delightfully harmless game; and down on the main deck, “for’rard”
that that disk missed the whole hopscotch plan a yard or two, and then
being lashed to his chair.
book; and he dashes at this work with an enthusiasm that imposes on him
know I wrote nine the night before and twelve the night before that.
done.”
“Now I’ll go and stroll around the cafes awhile, Jack, and give you a

were approaching and discussed the information so obtained.
asthmatic and apt to catch its breath where it ought to come out strong,

success of all the amusement experiments.
all the time until we contracted with him to restrain himself.  But
“Why, I’m not trying to improve it--and I am singing like the others
There were even grumblers at the prayers.  The executive officer said the
CHAPTER V.
we reflected that we were gaining about twenty minutes every day because
“What’s a swindle?”
score sure.”
color.  The nautilus is nothing but a transparent web of jelly that
peace, I got up and went sleepily on deck.  It was five and a half
somber shade between.  It was the aurora borealis of the frozen pole
about noon that so tossed and pitched the vessel that common sense
The islands belong to Portugal, and everything in Fayal has Portuguese
vermin surrounded us on all sides and glared upon us; and every moment
remain so for the next ten thousand years, but each island shapes its
voice, while the roses in his cheeks turned to ashes:
unnoticed from nerveless fingers.  Each man sought his neighbor’s eye,

CHAPTER VI.
contain a population of about 200,000, almost entirely Portuguese.
wood and whose axles turn with the wheel.  There is not a modern plow in
them rich and contented.  Fine grapes used to grow in the islands, and an
a cable ten years ago, but it had been in his mind somehow that they
money and contracted for unlimited masses for the repose of her soul, and
of almost life size, very elegantly wrought and dressed in the fanciful
mounted the ungainly affairs and submitted to the indignity of making a
Blucher could do nothing at all with his donkey.  The beast scampered
the catastrophe and waited for their dismembered saddles to be patched up
neatly paved with small smooth pebbles, or compactly paved ones like

“John Brown’s Body” in ruinous English.
and thrust its summit above the white clouds like an island adrift in a
A week of buffeting a tempestuous and relentless sea; a week of
lightning clove it with a quivering line of fire that revealed a heaving

a blue haze and their summits swathed in clouds--the same being according
The picture on the other hand was very beautiful to eyes weary of the

that in one kingdom.
strip from the Atlantic to the Mediterranean, a distance of a quarter of
of the Spain distress than the Gibraltar guides started another--a
work, and it must have cost a vast deal of money and labor.  The gallery

“Senor, that high hill yonder is called the Queen’s Chair--”
impossible a project as the taking it by assault--and yet it has been
In that cave also are found human bones, crusted with a very thick, stony
one.
complacency and independence about them) like ours, made up from fifteen
arguments, only with the big words all tangled, and play them in your

of his verses to consuls, commanders, hotel keepers, Arabs, Dutch--to
they pointed out a hill and told him it was 800 feet high and 1,100 feet


States of America to Europe, Asia, and Africa, who had been to the Club
I tugged at it diligently, but it was discouraging work.  She said:
that only comes with long practice.”  The whole after-guard of the glove
and as I passed out with a fascinating bow I thought I detected a light
gloves.”
They let me alone then for the time being.  We always let each other

exaggerations--they seemed too weird and fanciful for reality.  But
know; within their sacred walls no Christian dog can enter.  And the
that only come a little below his knee and yet have twenty yards of stuff
the middle of it from side to side--the selfsame fashion their Tangier
castles and battled with giants and genii in the fabled days of the olden
Christian era.

bona-fide god, because that would be unconstitutional.
shoemaker, or vendor of trifles sits cross-legged on the floor and
change.”  I bought nearly half a pint of their money for a shilling
good while it was unsuspected, but after that the marauders simply gave
his money.
increase!) when we came upon a fine Moorish mosque, with tall tower, rich
bystanders.
mend the clock, and let him go as an ass!”
is not artistic.  They slice around the bone a little, then break off the
father; if he finds her diseased, the same; or if, after just and
the wisdom that leads them to cover up such atrocious ugliness.
the pavement time and again, says his prayers, and goes back to his work.
land or sea.  They are usually gone from five to seven months, and as

compromised on an augmentation of her territory, twenty million dollars’
then a circle of all sorts of cats; and, finally, a centerpiece of
seize upon their letters and papers when the mail arrives, read them over

brilliantly blue, that it overcame the dullest sensibilities with the

The poet replied with a barbarous rhyme and went below.
own responsibility; but when you begin to soar--when you begin to support
information at a later hour, from the almanac.  All the flags were sent
all listened to so often without paying any attention to what it said;
one.  Captain Duncan made a good speech; he made the only good speech of
its clustering spires and ramparts, and flood its leagues of environing
boatman to explain his conduct, which he did; and then I couldn’t
ignorant person yet but was prejudiced.  The Frenchman spoke again, and

--des oeufs--du boeuf--horseradish, sauerkraut, hog and hominy--anything,
its nature to the forgetfulness of everything else, and coming to feel
“Why, he told us which way to go to find the Grand Casino.”
member.
began the business of sightseeing immediately.  That first night on
orchestra; and every now and then actors and actresses in preposterous
noiseless waiters, who glide hither and thither, and hover about your
enough, and then, of course, an annoying delay follows.  These
have a strange fashion of telling a perfectly straight story till you get
expect to leave the soup out of the bill of fare as the wine!--in a land
years or thereabouts.  Romulus was here before he built Rome, and thought
and preposterously uncomely bird!  He was so ungainly, so pimply about
“All he wants now is a Plymouth Collection.”
has a melancholy history.  It has been used as a prison for political
in filth and wretchedness, with no companionship but his own thoughts,
of dungeon life and seemed made of slow, dragging weeks instead of hours
thick wall with some trifling instrument which he wrought himself out of
man whose dolorous story is a sealed book forever!  There was fascination
and plummet, and their uniform height determined with a spirit level.

quicker by so doing.  It is hard to make railroading pleasant in any
six mustangs scamper under the sharp snapping of the whip that never
railway and that royal summer flight across a continent in a stagecoach.
is no water to drink in the car; there is no heating apparatus for night
secured your ticket, and you cannot pass from its only exit till the
minutes to dinner!  No five-minute boltings of flabby rolls, muddy
up a club till the train went by, to signify that everything was safe
engineer must answer.
aim, is to subjugate you, keep you down, make you feel insignificant and
Fontainebleau, and scores of other beautiful cities, we swept, always
never a word.  A kind of hackman general seemed to have the whole matter

brilliant streets and looked at the dainty trifles in variety stores and
stranger bought in one of their stores might be depended upon as being
So we searched high and low, for a matter of two hours, but never a
from obscure places and a ransacking for soap.  Next they took us into a

that matter.  The impostor who does duty as a barber brings his pans and
“scratches” that were perfectly bewildering.  We had played at Gibraltar
We adjourned to one of those pretty cafes and took supper and tested the
Paris”; we talked disjointedly in a vain endeavor to make head or tail of
Americans to Paris that it would be next to impossible to find a good
bleeding forms of speech that no human ingenuity could ever have gotten
his teeth.  His opening speech was perfect.  It was perfect in
“Billfinger!  Oh, carry me home to die!”
Oh!  This is absurd, you know.  This will never do.  We can’t say
breakfast as soon as we had finished ours.  He knew we could not get


Emperor Napoleon live here now, Ferguson?”
“At last!  How imposing the Louvre is, and yet how small!  How
the time.  However, we will proceed now to the Louvre, Ferguson.”
late.  It want ten minute to four and ze Louvre close at four--only one
first time and sees its sights alone or in company with others as little
exhibition.  I got a little interested in some curious old tapestries of
away to see what she might look like.  We heard martial music--we saw an
of artillery; then more cavalry, in splendid uniforms; and then their


burst of eloquence upon unsympathetic ears; found himself a prisoner, the
moves navies and armies--who holds in his hands the power of life and
and brutality--and will idle away the allotted days of his trivial life
anyone uncomfortable.

spectacles that have grieved or delighted Paris.  These battered and
preserved in Paris; and that a Christian church took its place about A.D.
did.
noble effort cost him his life.  He was shot dead.  They showed us a cast
water-soaked; the delicate garments of women and children; patrician
stood there, but nothing of the kind occurred.  Men and women came, and
depot, toward evening, and Ferguson got tickets for a second-class
large, handsome house with its ample front illuminated in the same way,
donkey might make, but a sensible man never.  I committed an error which
But Blondin came out shortly.  He appeared on a stretched cable, far away
dancers.  I backed up against the wall of the temple, and waited.  Twenty
There is no word of exaggeration in this.  Any of the staid, respectable,
We visited the Louvre, at a time when we had no silk purchases in view,
Of course we drove in the Bois de Boulogne, that limitless park, with its
neighborhood of a thousand of them,) were bestridden by gallant-looking
chopped down or forgotten within the next five years, but it will be
of miniature marble temples and mansions of the dead gleaming white from
than the sixteen centuries that have passed over him, Clovis slept well
stormy spirit knew no music like the bugle call to arms.  The man who
of the history of its dead and comprehends that homage is due there, but
you will, you find it furnished with those bouquets and immortelles.  Go
Heloise was born seven hundred and sixty-six years ago.  She may have had
strength and beauty created a profound sensation.  He saw Heloise, and
Abelard was glad enough of the opportunity.  He came often and staid
instinct was a ludicrous “simplicity,” this unmanly Abelard seduced the
--but on a shameful condition: that the marriage should be kept secret
Fulbert!  The heart so wounded should be healed at last; the proud spirit

of unwavering affection, he in the chilly phraseology of the polished
establishment which he had founded.  She had many privations and
him, the cunning of his tongue was gone: with his speech unspoken, he
troubled spirit of the old smooth-bore.  Rest and repose be his!

in the least likely to be abroad on such an errand.  The truth was, it
Our general said, “We will take a whiskey straight.”
last order--began to back away, shrugging his shoulders and spreading his
while the multitude about him was growing thicker and thicker every
Gardes!  The officer saluted again and fell back, the New Jersey sprite
libraries, imperial palaces, and sculpture and picture galleries, the
“Quick, Ferguson!  Is that a grisette?”
another idol of my infancy.
be able to make--and glad, as well, that my comrades cordially endorse
VERSAILLES!  It is wonderfully beautiful!  You gaze and stare and try to
direction and wandered to seemingly interminable distances, walled all
are vast.  I used to think the pictures exaggerated these distances and

picturesque.  The trees in no two avenues are shaped alike, and
to be in such a place was useless unless one had a whole year at his
carriages that showed no color but gold--carriages used by former kings

All through this Faubourg St. Antoine, misery, poverty, vice, and crime
never afford refuges and plotting places for starving, discontented

apparent (to them) that our men were afraid to come out.  They went away
and at night there were gaps in the euchre-parties which could not be
I would like to remain here.  I had rather not go any further.  There may
in a large park on the top of a hill in the center of the city, from six
Never smoke any Italian tobacco.  Never do it on any account.  It makes
Now, they surely must chew up those old stubs, and dry and sell them for
and portraits of heads of the family, in plumed helmets and gallant coats
roof would fall in on these dispiriting flunkies that I had but little
I have not been to church so often in a long time as I have in the last
frescoed ceilings, and so forth.  I cannot describe it, of course--it
statements, and yet we could not feel certain that they were correct
they have part of one in Sainte Chapelle, in Paris, and part of one also
you go up three flights of stairs before you begin to come upon signs of
halfway up to heaven.  And then you wonder that such a charming moth
scenes, with monstrous Jupiters and Cupids, and with familiar
that are as thick as an ordinary American doorway is high cannot
patrician families.  Descendants of some of those proud families still
beautiful forms.  They make bunches of flowers, from flakes and wires of
stretch upward farther than ever toward the heavens, the memory of a cave
forgotten the palaces.  It is a vast marble collonaded corridor extending

Beyond Alessandria we passed the battle-field of Marengo.
Half of that night, and all of the next day, this architectural autocrat
will surely turn to seek it.  It is the first thing you look for when you
Raphael, Angelo, Canova--giants like these gave birth to the designs, and
close at hand, but diminishing in the distance like the pipes of an

The guide showed us a coffee-colored piece of sculpture which he said was
It is hard to forget repulsive things.  I remember yet how I ran off from
at the heart--such a sudden gasp for breath!  I felt--I cannot tell what
not scared, but I was considerably agitated.
faint-hearted, visiting the sick; in relieving distress, whenever and
walls were faced with bas-reliefs representing scenes in his life done in
solemnity, the grandeur, the awful majesty of Death!  Think of Milton,
volunteered to show us the treasures of the church.
in proportion.  It was an Aladdin’s palace.  The treasures here, by
through the streets of Milan.
finish the cathedral.  It looks complete, but is far from being so.  We
familiarity with it might dissipate this impression.

mine that I remembered years and years ago in pictures in the geography
created a fountain of commiseration for them in sentimental breasts that

wall that we took them to be sculptures.  The artist had shrewdly
before it.  We said that was nothing.  We looked again, and saw, through
We adjourned to a cafe and played billiards an hour, and I made six or
this one matter lies the main charm of life in Europe--comfort.  In
if we would only lay ourselves on the shelf occasionally and renew our
never sees a drunken man among them.  The change that has come over our
throw myself against the door--she would have been in, in another second.
“Soap, you know--soap.  That is what I want--soap.  S-o-a-p, soap;

Marseillaise only have a vague theoretical idea of its use, which they

     splendid view near the Villas Melzy, to the King of Belgian, and
Supper,” by Leonardo da Vinci.  We are not infallible judges of pictures,
in ancient times, I suppose.  It is battered and scarred in every
many artists transferring the great picture to their canvases.  Fifty
the wall, and there is no life in the eyes.  Only the attitudes are

toward any of them.  But at the same time the thought will intrude itself
we can not absolutely see these things when they are not there.  I am
art that make such a fine show in conversations concerning pictures.

Expression!  People coolly pretend to read it who would think themselves

artists painted Italian Virgins, the Dutch painted Dutch Virgins, the
unconsciously worked his nationality into the picture.  To tell the

than we could count.  She took a speaking trumpet and through it she

was a failure.
We passed through a range of wild, picturesque hills, steep, wooded,
the putrefaction and corruption imaginable.
Christian.  I try to do what is right.  I know it is my duty to “pray for
the gardens, and the mountains; a summing up of the day’s events.  Then
mountains is here, but the lake itself is not a basin.  It is as crooked
fancifully adorned with creeping vines and bright-colored flowers--for
half way up its vast wall, sits a little snowflake of a church, no bigger
distance lend enchantment to the view--for on this broad canvas, sun and

          From out a glossy bower of coolest foliage musical with birds.”
pebble on the bottom--might even count a paper of dray-pins.  People talk
no crystal waters, no picturesque shores, no sublimity.  Tahoe for a sea
People say that Tahoe means “Silver Lake”--“Limpid Water”--“Falling
hundred and twenty-five feet deep in the centre, by the state geologist’s
It is cheerful to meet a shipmate in these out-of-the-way places and
and that we would arrive there in good season for the railway train.  We
drawing-room and bed-chamber and were not molested.  The drivers of each
that supported it; the cup of vinegar; the ladder for the ascent of the
fumigators.
swung its green banners down from towers and turrets where once some old

culverin, he rode through the greaves and bucklers of his donjon-keep
pined in prisons, he languished in loathsome plague-hospitals.  And many
there, for love of Christian charity, and if perchance, a moral parlor
all!  Alack-a-day, the good Lord Luigi reigns not here in these sad


mountebanks.  Afterward, broil them with the priests.”
“S’death!  What can ye do?  Curb thy prating tongue.”



men-at-arms into chops and steaks.  The victory was complete.  Happiness

tarry to speak of the handsome Lago di Gardi; its stately castle that

piers are deserted, her warehouses are empty, her merchant fleets are
rags, her poverty and her humiliation, and think of her only as she was
barefooted guttersnipe with a portion of his raiment on exhibition which


evolutions.  Here and there a strong red, green, or blue glare from a
paper-lanterned gondolas from the suburbs and the back alleys crowded
and all partly submerged; no dry land visible any where, and no sidewalks
sculptures are hidden in shadows, and the old city seems crowned once
          Clings to the marble of her palaces.
What would one naturally wish to see first in Venice?  The Bridge of
should have had Marino Faliero’s picture in it, and that was blank and
again.  This was in the old days when the Patricians alone governed
dungeon and unto his death.  At no time in his transit was he visible to
frozen, upright and silent, till they received a bloody order, and then,
across the narrow canal that intervenes.  The ponderous stone Bridge of
own memory at last, and knowing no more who he was or how he came there;
They used to show to visitors the implements of torture wherewith the
--nothing in its composition is domestic.  Its hoary traditions make it an
to scrape a sort of hurrahing acquaintance with him.  That seems to be
Venice is much younger than any other Italian city,) a priest dreamed
city, they only glanced once into his precious baskets, then turned up
like a canoe; its sharp bow and stern sweep upward from the water like
the gondolier stands there.  He uses a single oar--a long blade, of
precision, and goes darting in and out among a Broadway confusion of busy
against the evening sky, they make a picture that is very novel and
good-bye, and flirt their fans and say “Come soon--now do--you’ve been
diffident young man, mild of moustache, affluent of hair, indigent of
waiting at the curbstone a couple of hours for them,--waiting while they
youth and beauty; we hear the cries of the hackman-gondoliers, and behold
of it and countless couples of ladies and gentlemen promenade up and down
unflinchingly in the face--not because such conduct is agreeable to us,
On this subject let me remark that there are Americans abroad in Italy
     “J. Ellsworth Baker, tout de suite de France, place de
sound of his name! He wore a rose in his button-hole; he gave the French
their national ways and customs, but we look back upon it from abroad
permitted a public funeral in all that season of terror and death.
In the conventual buildings attached to this church are the state
light of these hoary sanctuaries, in the midst of long ranks of dusty
seen Tintoretto’s monster picture, which is seventy-four feet long and I
gifted with prophecy, and had skipped a martyr, and gone over to England
mastered some things, possibly of trifling import in the eyes of the
seen thirteen thousand St. Jeromes, and twenty-two thousand St. Marks,
would hide my uncouth sentiments in my own breast.  But alas!  I never


that I “wished to goodness high art had declined five hundred years


“Hold on, please.  Shave me also.”
fervent execrations.  The barber grew confused, and brought blood every
living horse in their lives.  It is entirely true, no doubt.
sickness.
imputation that I visited Florence and did not traverse its weary miles
literati, and not to Florence or her rulers.  We saw Dante’s tomb in that
die early, because the labor is so confining, and so exhausting to hand
so deftly and so neatly that any man might think a master painted it.

sometimes!  I might enter Florence under happier auspices a month hence
--not even a policeman.  I walked till I was out of all patience, and very
d’Europe, and they continued to shake their heads, until at last a young
with friends.  My experiences of Florence were chiefly unpleasant.  I
some of marble and some of granite, with Corinthian capitals that were
time, under the silly impression that if it is not falling, your trifling
has.  Pondering, in its suggestive presence, I seemed to see a crazy
will remain long with me.
little history of itself that is tangible and comprehensible.  A Pisan
flesh and warmed with human sympathies so vividly as did this poor little
the city gates were closed for the evening, and then came on board the
The stupid magnates of this Leghorn government can not understand that so
carnage, insurrection and sedition in it.  A visit paid in a friendly

marble, with stately colonnades of the same royal stone traversing them
these great works.  The prosperity they would seem to indicate is a
desperate circumstances.  They, in a manner, confiscated the domains of
manufacture, and since they pay no taxes, who can hope to compete with
Pray glance at some of these churches and their embellishments, and see
wrought in costly verde antique; pulpits of the same rich materials,
death with taxation to uphold a perishing Government?
too suggestive, and I said, “O, sons of classic Italy, is the spirit of
now.  They say the entire mausoleum was intended for the Holy Sepulchre,
Virgin Mary and the angels, (to say nothing of higher personages,) and

And now----.  However, another beggar approaches.  I will go out and
cholera was raging in Naples; when the people were dying by hundreds and
bloody-minded son of the Inquisition!  He and the leader of the marine
carpeted with deceased cats, and decayed rags, and decomposed
When they see any body with a clean shirt on, it arouses their scorn.
will be alone sufficient to silence the tongues of malignant
immediately said I would explain the document, and they crowded around.
they think I am a dangerous character.

something, say something, see something, before any body else--these are
lived--who have actually comprehended what pleasure is--who have crowded
stand before my countrymen an illustrious discoverer.  I would say:
bricks; I solemnly swear they are made of wood.  Houses there will take
world is concerned, but much, very much use, as concerns this; because
with facility perhaps, else they would not use them; and in the mouths

have the privilege of buying land and houses, and owning them themselves,
seven.  They are curious people.  They do not know when they are well
a three-cornered block of wood that merely scratches the top of the
and thirty feet.  I knew it was three hundred and sixty-four feet wide,
of the Washington capitol set one on top of the other--if the capitol
great bronze pyramidal frame-work like that which upholds a mosquito bar.
door of St. Peter’s and look at men down toward its further extremity,
always go up there to look down into the church because one gets the best

host.  He can see the spot where the Horatii and the Curatii fought their
moved over it in other days bringing fettered princes from the confines
Inquisition and pointed to the Blessed Redeemer, who was so gentle and so
ashes of Peter, the disciple of the Saviour, repose in a crypt under the
night.  The print of the face in the prison was that of a man of common
gimcracks, does reluctant duty as a Virgin Mary to-day, is built about
room for eighty thousand persons and standing room for twenty thousand
arena of the Coliseum and turned wild beasts in upon them.  It is
manner something about “my private box at the Coliseum” could not move in

     seven.  Mother will be absent on a visit to her friends in the

gladiator who has just arrived a prisoner from the Camp of Verus.
talent of the Empire will take part

the Roman Daily Battle-Ax, containing a critique upon this very
     the imperial box, and was the cynosure of all eyes.  Many
     “The opening scene last night--the broadsword combat between two
     the railings of the arena.  She was promptly removed by the police.
     which was replete with wit and humor, and closed by hoping that his
     of one and almost in the same instant its edge clove the other’s
     dignity of the metropolis.  We trust our young friend will take
     that the practice of vulgar young boys in the gallery of shying
     Material change of programme every evening.  Benefit of Valerian,
So far, good.  If any man has a right to feel proud of himself, and
bacon and beans of the country, and determined to do in Nevada as Nevada
we slept; the wind swept across our faces and froze our noses.  Oliver
Awakened two or three nights afterward at midnight, in a narrow canon, by
--or blasting it out when it came hard.  He heard an animal’s footsteps
part of a cow--the after part.  He leaned back in dread, and shouted
Buonarotti.  I used to worship the mighty genius of Michael Angelo--that
uniform of the Pope’s soldiers, the Tiber, the Vatican, the Coliseum, the
through miles of pictures and sculpture in twenty other palaces; he has


nature to take delight in exciting admiration.  It is what prompts
countenance, and look more like an inspired idiot, and throw more
keys and opening of locks, the stained and aged document was spread

“I don’t care who it is!  It’s the worst writing I ever saw.  Now you
--beautiful bust, beautiful pedestal!”
--pleasant name--is--is he dead?”

We have made it interesting for this Roman guide.  Yesterday we spent
The eye-glass came up as calmly, as deliberately as ever.
“Born in Egypta.  Never heard of Egypta before.  Foreign locality,
paid us back, partly, without knowing it.  He came to the hotel this

sometimes burrowed to escape persecution.  They crawled out at night to
passages crossing and recrossing each other and each passage walled to
Bridget used to remain long hours in holy contemplation, and St. Charles
of one St. Joseph Calasanctius whose house in Rome he visited; he visited
Neligan’s faith, and let him make the conditions as hard as he pleased.
     hands the portrait of the Virgin, (which is over the high altar and
CHAPTER XXVIII.
bones!  There were shapely arches, built wholly of thigh bones; there
“Who were these people?”
the wrong leg, in the confusion, and the wrong skull, and find themselves
Yorick.
hair--faded, somewhat--by this thin shred that clings still to the
this muscle--from here it is passed to this fibrous substance; here its
day be taken apart like an engine or a clock, or like a house whose owner
brought down to us through the circling years, and petrified there, was a
other things it is not necessary to mention now.  I shall remember the
acres and acres of walls and ceilings fairly papered with them, might I
Forty-Mile Desert, and a European gallery is a state dinner of thirteen
have the satisfaction of informing the public.
thank the Holy Father right heartily, and I wish him long life and plenty
The guide showed us a colossal statue of Jupiter, in the Vatican, which
of those in the private collections.  I am satisfied, also, that genuine
of all the Catholic churches of the world.  The group represents the
First--“The Mother of God”--otherwise the Virgin Mary.
I can discover.  There are some four hundred churches, but about a fourth
ourselves, and growing defaced and cornerless, and liable at any moment

having cavorting about the country and sailing to the islands in the Bay.
some provisions for the trip, engaged carriages to take us to
--infest you--swarm about you, and sweat and smell offensively, and look
faded now and whose voice has lost its former richness.  Every body spoke
rowdies by her brave, unflinching tranquillity (for she answered encore
be very good people; I can not say.
as the houses grow smaller, till on the eighth day, with only a few
City Government stopped the Madonna’s annual show.
themselves for aiming so low, and immediately ask more.  When money is to
Perhaps I am.  I would be ashamed of myself if I were not.
mountain side.  We saw nothing but the gas lamps, of course--two-thirds

little differently.  To see Naples as we saw it in the early dawn from
mist and general vagueness far away.  It is from the Hermitage, there on
court, in every alley!  Such masses, such throngs, such multitudes of
out from the first floor, people a shade smaller from the second, people

evening, all Naples turns out to drive on the ‘Riviere di Chiaja’,

dollars and a half a month, but I have heard of a foreman who gets
Fine kid boots are worth eight dollars in Marseilles and four dollars
would let us land.  The airs these little insect Governments put on are
bubbles that are created flash out a brilliant glare like blue theatrical
submerged city still visible far down in its depths--these and a hundred

shapes, all this turbulent panorama, all this stormy, far-stretching
eternity, perhaps.  We left the mules, sharpened our finger-nails, and
a brilliant and beautiful color, and the ditch inclosed this like the
mosses were frosted with a shining dust, and tinted with palest green
our handkerchiefs, there was small danger of suffocation.
knee-deep in loose ashes, and ploughed our way with prodigious strides
story by myself.
thrown open freely to the light of day; and there stand the long rows of
of the wilderness of walls, were wonderfully suggestive of the “burnt
Commissioners to avoid their duty whenever they get a chance?  I wish I
“Marine Gate,”) and by the rusty, broken image of Minerva, still keeping
The floors were laid in fanciful figures wrought in mosaics of
have seen in Europe, came from the exhumed cities of Herculaneum and

those long dead inhabitants and place the living before your eyes.  For
sweep of empty boxes, and thought to myself, “This house won’t pay.”  I
store, far down the long street of the merchants, and called for the
almost as fresh as if they were painted yesterday, but which no pen could
announcements for gladiatorial combats, elections, and such things, were
caught him at the very threshold, and he sank down and died.  One more
research, was that grand figure of a Roman soldier, clad in complete
evidences that the houses were more than one story high.  The people did
most bustling and business-like way, was as strange a thing as one could
     in their despair begged that death would come and end their
strikes me with a force it never had before: the unsubstantial, unlasting
     flourished about A. D. 742; but the learned Ah-ah Foo-foo states
was no tale of sickness or death among the flock to dampen the pleasure
about us, we sighted superb Stromboli.  With what majesty the monarch
and waiting to see famous Scylla and Charybdis.  And presently the Oracle
“It ain’t mentioned in the Bible!--this place ain’t--well now, what place
anyhow, for once in his life.  He said, in Rome, that the Pope was a
But what were sunsets to us, with the wild excitement upon us of
them loomed the venerable Parthenon.  So exquisitely clear and pure is
disappointment we had yet experienced.  To lie a whole day in sight of
school books.
intending to go clear around the Piraeus, out of the range of its police.
expedition, and so we dropped it.  We made the entire circuit of the town
Seeing no road, we took a tall hill to the left of the distant Acropolis
dark shape rose mysteriously up out of the shadows beside us and said
either, and I wanted to follow the road till we were abreast of them, but
flimsy structure of wood--we would break it down.  It seemed like

pillars, whose flutings and capitals are still measurably perfect,
As we wandered thoughtfully down the marble-paved length of this stately
up in piles--scattered broadcast over the wide area of the Acropolis
temple they knew so well and regarded with such boundless pride.
little temple, whose delicate pillars and ornate front glowed with a rich
celebrated names!  But more than all, I wished that old Diogenes, groping
ascended, and stood in the square-cut place he stood in, and tried to
     inscription: To THE UNKNOWN GOD.  Whom, therefore, ye ignorantly
by this happy failure, my valor became utterly uncontrollable, and at
have talked with him as not if we had not been in a hurry.  Presently
tranquilly in our wake.  When they had gone three hundred yards they
whom had fallen asleep, no doubt, but were on hand, nevertheless.  This
in a moment that it was a police-boat on the lookout for any
We set sail for Constantinople to-day, but some of us little care for

I suppose that ancient Greece and modern Greece compared, furnish the
distance not exceeding six leagues) and from extravagant taxes on trade
while.  It was offered to one of Victoria’s sons, and afterwards to
saw where Troy had stood (in the distance,) and where it does not stand
of men on it, and if it had not been purposely destroyed, it would
We dropped anchor in the mouth of the Golden Horn at daylight in the
much ground as New York City.  Seen from the anchorage or from a mile or
It is a long, light canoe (caique,) large at one end and tapering to a
in; no absurdity too absurd to be tolerated; no frenzy in ragged
as cottages on their backs; peddlers of grapes, hot corn, pumpkin seeds,
feet long, with a crook in the end of it, and occasionally a goose would
arrangement.
against the three-legged woman, and the man with his eye in his cheek?
long body, legs eight inches long and feet like snow-shoes.  He traveled
appreciation.  We will let it go at that.  It is the rustiest old barn in
hundred and seventy pillars in it, each a single piece, and all of costly
earth, muttering prayers the while, and keeping up their gymnastics till
their critical bathos on painting, sculpture and architecture forever
it up during the whole twenty-five.  His robe filled with air and stood
day, all the wild tales in the Arabian Nights.  Even so an intelligent
the Turkish occupation, and I thought he made a remark to that effect;
We went to the great Bazaar in Stamboul, of course, and I shall not
and weirdly dressed Mohammedans from the mountains and the far provinces

                        SLAVE GIRL MARKET REPORT.
     say, also, that the new crop of Circassians is looking extremely
Prices are pretty high now, and holders firm; but, two or three years
worth his weight in broad pieces of a hundred--for behold, he will cheat

arms.  They hardly seemed to have strength enough or ambition enough to

dogs have a sort of air of being on the lookout--an air born of being
between, occasionally chipping a leg with their sharp hoofs, and when the
animal, it is said.  But they do worse.  They hang and kick and stone and
have not a red fez on their heads.  I only say that it would be mean for
It was curious to see newsboys selling papers in so dreamy a land as
long time, they get suspicious and throttle it anyhow, because they think
who does not relish our sympathy with the Cretans, and therefore that
elsewhere.  They take advantage of popular weaknesses.  When they find
the little lunch room, near the bazaar, and it was all open to the
ration of sausage.  The cook got out his wire, apportioned a proper
passed through another complex ordeal, and one more fearful than the
another, carpeted with seedy matting, railed with unpainted balustrades,
take in washing.  I was then conducted down stairs into the wet, slippery
merely the unpretending sort of thing I have seen in the negro quarters
taste, and the taste of a thousand infidel tongues that remained on that
“I perceive that I am pretty far gone.  It is plain that I ought to be
be the tail of a horse.  He made up a prodigious quantity of soap-suds,
about it.  Then he brought the world-renowned Turkish coffee that poets
with a charm of poetry is able to do the same with any thing else in the
recognized celebrity.  However, we can not alter our established customs
else.  But we ought to be pleased with it, nevertheless, for we have been
Englishmen and others who were delayed days, weeks, and even months, in
pleasantly as it did when it fell from those English lips in this far-off
They said if we would go, they would not only telegraph the Emperor, but
of.  The houses had all been solid, dressed stone structures; most of
rifle-shot of the Malakoff; Inkerman was a mile away; and Balaklava
them, they are lonely and silent--their desolation is complete.
of teeth and part of the jaw-bone of a horse.  I said with some asperity:
from twenty celebrated localities five hundred miles apart.  I
collections in the same way.  I shall never have any confidence in such
distresses about the time have worried me so much that I was afraid my

presto! the illusion vanished!  The church had a slender-spired dome that
apt to dissipate to excess.  We never cared any thing about ice-cream at
make it one of the great cities of the Old World--built this noble
a scratching around there will be, now! what a holding of important
it, their sides bristling with pines--cloven with ravines--here and there
fell like a blight on every hopeful spirit: he had never seen a court
one accord, the party must begin to bow--not obsequiously, but
was over--where every body was smiling, and yet broken-hearted.
room in the house able to accommodate our three-score persons
bore it with unflinching fortitude; then took the rusty-looking document
light-haired, blue-eyed, unassuming and pretty.  Every body talks
sashes about their waists; linen collars and clerical ties of muslin;
to seventy millions of human beings!  She was only a girl, and she
like other men’s.  Here was a man who could do this wonderful thing, and
his family conducted us all through their mansion themselves.  They made
Michael’s, a mile away, in response to his invitation, previously given.
fragrance, and in their midst springs a fountain that cools the summer
taller than the Czar, as straight as an Indian, and bears himself like

suggested it to his Imperial Highness.  I think not--though it would be
into it, or iced milk, if he prefers it.  The former is best.  This tea
parquette, and order Dukes and Duchesses off to execution.  I find,
I shall feel bound to observe that all the Emperors that ever I was
America than they could by showering attentions on a whole platoon of
Two alternatives were offered him--he must either swear a dreadful oath
lively time of it, anyhow.  We have had quite a run of visitors.  The
at the reception, came on board also.  I was a little distant with these

We had General Todtleben (the famous defender of Sebastopol, during the
marches about the city and voyages up the Golden Horn in caiques, we
     “We are a handful of private citizens of America, traveling simply
“watch below,” transformed into graceless ladies and uncouth pilgrims, by
The Emperor--“Then what the devil did you come for?”

As I was a member of the committee, and helped to frame the Address,
rudely and roughly paved, and as narrow as an ordinary staircase; the
claiming the bulk of attention first, last, and all the time--is a
great commerce and full of energy, while the cities wherein were located
cheerfully and complacently of poor, ruined Ephesus as the victim of
the pilgrims invariably make them refer to the cities instead.  No crown
of Smyrna, or something else kills the town; and suppose, also, that
prophecy-enthusiast blundered along and said, to the infinite disgust of
put arguments into the mouth of infidelity.
forgiven me.  They are very sociable, and will smile back when a stranger
ceased to think of that girl.  I have written to her, but I can not
train, with heavy loads on their backs, and a fancy-looking negro in

hurried on.
probably could not have afforded a church edifice, and in the second
that once adorned the lordly palaces that were the glory of the city in
a well-defined lead by itself, and without a spur.  My first instinct was
had no such places away up there on that mountain side in our time,

most natural conclusion would be that the oysters climbed up there to
fly up into heaven at the first blast of the trumpet.  But the angel did
and the hotel floor was flooded with water.  The dinner had to be
It runs almost to the very gates of Ephesus--a town great in all ages of

an American man-of-war.
procession look more than ever fantastic--for be it known the ladies were

of workmanship, that it ranked high in the list of the Seven Wonders of
older than tradition itself.  It is incredible to reflect that things as
excursions, in galleys with silver oars and perfumed sails, and with
streams, and find a new interest in a common word when we discover that
and massive bases, and polished tablets engraved with Greek inscriptions.
majesty were never thrown into a form of stone before.
And now am I reminded of--
remember them when far away; and they took also the dog Ketmehr, which
end of five years they had waxed tired of travel and adventure, and

thousand men assembled; here is the Agora; there is the font where the
and purchased garments and clothed themselves.  And when they would have
roofs these six generations; the names ye utter rot upon the tombs, and
asked again, Where, then, is the good King Maximilianus?  The citizen
and upon them is writ, in ancient letters, such words as these--Dames of

vain about it.  This time I felt proud beyond expression.  I was serene
precautions would have been taken against any travelers, because the
critical inspection of saddles and bridles that had never yet touched
Syria, by Baalbec to Damascus, and thence down through the full length of
telegraphing was done, to the same end.  Also fearing for the worst, we
Beirout.  I mention this because I can not help admiring his patience,
former cities the sex wear a thin veil which one can see through (and
At the appointed time our business committee reported, and said all
We were to select our horses at 3 P.M.  At that hour Abraham, the
crates out of the hospital the way they are, unless he has got a permit.”
a good right I had to be astonished.  We had nineteen serving men and
--one set for each man; they pointed to pockets in the tent, and said we
napkins whose whiteness and whose fineness laughed to scorn the things we

                     “COME LIKE SPIRITS, SO DEPART.”
mountains.
had gathered the thousand odds and ends of the camp together and
here which has needles on it that would pierce through leather, I think;
same side always, it would get to be monotonous after a while.  This

immense, level, garden-like Valley of Lebanon.  To-night we are camping
it a little.  The grapes are most excellent to this day, but the bunches
          “* * * no man dug that sepulchre,

buried can only be doubted by uncommonly incredulous people.  The
diving-bell.  The Syrians are very poor, and yet they are ground down by
delays this duty day after day, while the producer’s family are

secure a man’s possessions but these random heaps of stones.  The
them without any very great effort.  The yelling and shouting, and
Syrian villages, and look strangely enough in such plebeian company.
delicate, the entablature, with its elaborate sculpture, looks like rich
roof of the building.  This porch-roof is composed of tremendous slabs of
two hundred feet long, is composed of blocks of stone as large, and some
bricks in these days.  A race of gods or of giants must have inhabited

righteous, becomes a sin, and this was a case in point.  We pleaded for
horses might die, but they must enter upon holy soil next week, with no
to pass--but I would so like to catch any other member of the party
into the night, seeking the honored pool of Baalam’s ass, the patron
and “thort-ships,” and every way, and on a horse that is tired and lame,
show.  The heat quivered in the air every where.  In the canons we almost
     thick with pomegranate, fig, olive and quince orchards, and nooned
     foot. How they sprang upon a bone, how they crunched the bread we
As the glare of day mellowed into twilight, we looked down upon a picture
him for the first time.
blighted, blasted, sandy, rocky, sun-burnt, ugly, dreary, infamous
is in the splendid city he saw from the hill-top.  The gardens are hidden
die.  So long as its waters remain to it away out there in the midst of
writings of every century for more than four thousand years, its name has
lives.  She has looked upon the dry bones of a thousand empires, and will
feet wide, and shut in on either side by the high mud-walls of the
comfortably furnished, and even had their floors clothed with soft,
then, and superb as the bath was, I was sorry I had taken it, and was
Any where else we would have been assailed by a clamorous army of
 or “Look this, Howajji!”  On the contrary, they only scowled at us and
knocked out of joint, we were wild with excitement, and our sides ached
     Saul, why persecutest thou me?’
There came a voice to a citizen of Damascus, named Ananias, saying,
the Master for thirty pieces of silver.  I make this explanation in
a good way, and then turned off and called at the reputed house of
purported to be that of St. George who killed the dragon, and so on out
It is soothing to the heart to abuse England and France for interposing
Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel?  May I not wash in them


madness to travel in Syria without an umbrella.  It was on this account
after the other; glaring straight ahead and breathless; bouncing high and
living about the year 1200 before Christ--or back to the patriarchs--or
let me fall bearing about me the semblance of a Christian, at least.
after a fashion.  The same roof often extends over half the town,
plains and on the hill-sides.  The village is built on some consumptive
settled where the great city of Babylon afterwards stood.  Nimrod built
of El Yuba Dam, perched on the side of a mountain, but the dragoman said
wandered for three hours among the chambers and crypts and dungeons of
From these old towers we looked down upon a broad, far-reaching green
where it gushes out of the mountain side, three hundred yards from the
Sepulchre when this tribe invades Jerusalem!
trees and bushes grow above many of these ruins now; the miserable huts
On those little sentences have been built up the mighty edifice of the
stood, and looking upon the brook and the mountains which that god looked
fantastic in its arrangement.  Any little absurd gewgaw or gimcrack they
for I see plenty of blind people every day, and I do not remember seeing
nature, had taken a child from a woman who sat near by, and put some sort
upon his face was written the unquestioning faith that nothing on earth
no wonder His audiences were so great at Galilee that He had to preach
years old, and had a very sweet face and a pretty one.  She was the only
arched like a culvert now.  His under lip hangs down like a camel’s, and
it.  I have seen the backs of all the other horses, and found most of
life!  Away, tempter, I scorn thy gold!”  and then bound into the saddle


and asses, it was about a seven days’ journey from Dan to Beersheba---say
Israelites, let us not be airy with them, but reflect that it was and is
Some forty centuries ago the city of Sodom was pillaged by the Arab
of fertile land; at the end of the valley, toward Dan, as much as half
We had been painfully clambering over interminable hills and rocks for
muscular, and very dark-skinned Bedouins, with inky black beards.  They
and the woman walks.  The customs have not changed since Joseph’s time.
Here you do not stop just when you please, but when you can.  We found

thing to him in the first place, and wondered what in the mischief he was
     “And when all these Kings were met together, they came and pitched
Jabin’s forces, who were in command of Sisera.  Barak won the fight, and
the memorable service she had rendered, in an exultant strain:
Stirring scenes like these occur in this valley no more.  There is not a

man of only ordinary size.  I must try to reduce my ideas of Palestine to
equal to four of our counties of ordinary size.  The poor old sheik we
disappeared again and left no sign.

in and out among the rocks or lay still and sunned themselves.  Where


Church if it was so, and he said it was, and what Mr. Church tells me, I
it down, and drawing the skin over his eyes for a minute and then
one Joseph’s brethren cast him into.  A more authentic tradition, aided

proposed to punish when the opportunity should offer.  When they saw him

had passed away and Jacob met Esau and fell at his feet quaking with fear
food”; and being summoned to a palace, charged with crime, they beheld in
Arabs, with their long guns, who were idling about the place, said they
admiration over them, and exhaust their powers of composition in writing
think of the ruined purses this day’s performances might result in.
miles, in weariness and tribulation.  What wonder that the sordid lights
year in these waters!--and tell him we’ll stop at Magdala and finish at
O, to think of it! this--this--after all that overmastering ecstacy!
Well, there was nothing to do but just submit and forego the privilege of
mildest sarcasm might have been dangerous at such a time.  Sinners that

stand by me till I walked out of Damascus on my own feet or was carried
diseases.  Here he healed the centurion’s servant and Peter’s
other that he fed the thousands by the miracles of the loaves and
yet who ever saw their names in a newspaper or heard them from a pulpit?
must have stolen into his mind often when he was ill-treated among
the howling deserts which surround them, but they are not as deliriously
larger than an ordinary county in the United States.  It is as much as I
and filthy--just the style of cities that have adorned the country since
convenient.  It is used for fuel.  There is no timber of any consequence
those days, in manners, customs, architecture, or people.
before.
They are particularly uncomely Jews, Arabs, and negroes.  Squalor and
with the indescribable hats on, and a long curl dangling down in front of
grandeur.  This modern town--Tiberias--is only mentioned in the New
it than with any other, and partly because I have such a high admiration

sweeps of rugged scenery topped with bald, glimmering peaks, all
two and get drowned into the bargain than have to live longer in such a
     uninteresting.  The first great characteristic of it is the deep
     departing footsteps of a hundred generations.  On the north-east
to the picture; eastward, “wild and desolate mountains;” (low, desolate
That is all.  I do not object to the witness dragging a mountain
     once beautiful and verdant with waving trees; singing birds enchant
One says, “Of the beauty of the scene I can not say enough,” and then
affection which some of these men felt for the scenes they were speaking
visited this land in years gone by, were Presbyterians, and came seeking
“smouch” their ideas from.  These authors write pictures and frame

and sounds with the supernatural.  In the lapping of the waves upon the
of the huge globe?
description--no fishing-tackle.  There were no fish to be had in the
a pirate dwelt upon land.  It was a tall Arab, as swarthy as an Indian;
holsters for more pistols appended to the wonderful stack of long-haired

and winked.
with us if we had to be protected at last by this infamous star-spangled
reported to the guide, and asked him to discharge this dismantled
to mention that the lake lies six hundred feet below the level of the
the battle-field of Hattin, where the knightly Crusaders fought their
     enemies and cost them their lives; wherefore, forty and two thousand
Kerak, broke it by plundering a Damascus caravan, and refusing to give up
and consuming thirst, were too great against them.  Towards the middle of

exceedingly pleasant to eyes surfeited with the repulsive monotony of
--a steel-blue corner of the Sea of Galilee--saddle-peaked Hattin,
suddenly upon leaping cascades and rustic bridges; finding sylvan lakes
bordered with sloping banks of grass and gay with patrician barges that
project, in the most careless way! a few broad tropic leaves and
from it all unattractive features, it was not a picture to fall into

Esdraelon, is the insignificant village of Deburieh, where Deborah,
hours into Christian miles, just as people do with the spoken words of a
small that you can jump your horse over them if he is an animal of
not think of any thing, now, more certain to make one shudder, than to
They do nothing whatever without pay.  How it must have surprised these
and august temples all over the civilized world, and one which the
I doubt if any man can stand in the Grotto of the Annunciation and people
mouth, they have also the Virgin’s Kitchen, and even her sitting-room,
rock will last forever.  It is an imposture--this grotto stuff--but it is
interest, and make you think.  The memory of the Pilgrims can not perish
We like the idea.  One’s conscience can never be the worse for the
face of a wall of ancient masonry which stands removed from the houses of

     “After we were in the saddle, we rode down to the spring to have a
     girl, would be a ‘thing of beauty’ and ‘a joy forever.’”
and the other on his pocket-handkerchief.  Always, when he was not on the
     breast, brain.”
At Beit Jin he gave his whole band of Arab muleteers a piece of his mind,
witnesses to prove that Putnam’s famous feat at Horseneck was

     tapering gradually from an inch in diameter to a point, it
Mohammedan sheik should deem proper.
     the trigger of my pistol when I rode with it in my right hand along
this.
not possible, standing by the Sea of Galilee, to frame more than a vague,
     bystanders praise God.

     makes itself a nest of frankincense, and myrrh, and other spices,
Business is business, and there is nothing like punctuality, especially
do not figure in the Bible, and of miracles that are not mentioned in its
I remember painfully, and possibly one or two mountain trails in the
for these spasms are sudden and irregular, and of course I cannot tell
pilgrimage, I intend to go through with it, though sooth to say, nothing
again, only here the glare from the infidel eyes was fierce and full of

We got away from the noisy wretches, finally, dropping them in squads and
elaborately lettred, gilded and painted, marks the burial place, and this
     “And he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood
old Arabs.  To step rudely upon the sacred praying mats, with booted
tails.  Tawny, black-eyed, barefooted maids, arrayed in rags and adorned
places on the donkeys’ backs; no disagreeable jabbering in unknown
rebuking a Pharisee, or some such character, and reminding him that from
question, for these people are and were in the habit of proffering favors
must always remember Shunem gratefully, as a place which gave to us this
romance out of him forever--to behold his steed is to long in charity to
sorely.  The Queen, a notorious character in those days, and whose name
pool of Samaria, the dogs licked the blood.  In after years, Jehu, who
teachers, and servants and friends of the family, and rested from his
lay the “Midianites, the Amalekites, and the Children of the East,” who
with the Mediterranean in sight some forty miles away, and going by many
The inhabitants of this camp are particularly vicious, and stoned two
hands of the King of Syria.  Provisions reached such a figure that “an
army broke camp and fled, for some cause or other, the famine was
The narrow canon in which Nablous, or Shechem, is situated, is under high
fellowship with their fellow men of any religion or nationality.  For
patriarchal way their ancestors did more than thirty centuries ago.  I
interest, which I propose to publish as soon as I have finished
Egypt which occurred four hundred years afterwards.  At the same time he
In this same “parcel of ground” which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor
ancestor, held some little time gone by, with the Messiah of the
the parlor.  Outside there were no inconveniences, except that the dusky,
forefathers brought with them out of Egypt.  It is little wonder that
repulsive and dreary the landscape became.  There could not have been
animals that are dead and gone centuries ago, had no interest for us--we


CHAPTER LIII.
one or two other buildings that rise into commanding prominence.
could have jumped double the distance without extraordinary exertion.  I
Moslem rule more surely than the crescent-flag itself, abound.  Lepers,

temple of yellow and white stone, of fanciful design.  Within the little
can not worship together around the grave of the Saviour of the World in
everywhere--all over the vast building, and at all hours.  Their candles
of these soon hit upon a plan that would be a certain test.  A noble lady
we listen to evidence like this, we cannot but believe.  We would be
True Cross, but it is gone, now.  This piece of the cross was discovered
Baldwin, and Tancred, the princely Saladin, and great Richard of the Lion
the good old Catholic monks preserve.  I can never forget old Godfrey’s
put to has given them the name they now bear.
changes, the column changes its position accordingly.  This column has
and made shadows it could not have made any for him.  Proofs like these
the dirt was not procured here whereof he was made.
into tears.  I deem it no shame to have wept over the grave of my poor
thundered, and in the baleful glare of the lightnings the shrouded dead
was here in the third century.  She traveled all over Palestine, and was
Then we went down into a cavern which cavilers say was once a cistern.
about to stop, she was told in a dream to continue a day longer.  It was
gentle Redeemer.  Two different congregations are not allowed to enter at
derision, “Prophesy who it is that smote thee.”  The tradition that this
remember Melchisedek, no doubt; he was the King who came out and levied a
another part of the church, and where John stood, and Mary Magdalen;
the execution a memorable place for ages; added to this, the storm, the
Sepulchre, but not in the place of the Crucifixion.  Five hundred years
do to keep it strictly before his mind that Christ was not crucified in a
within the altar, and his solemnity changes to lively admiration.  He
and once again, after he has satisfied all curiosity and lost all
claimed the sole right to put a new dome upon it.  History is full of
spot, and moved on.  We passed under the “Ecce Homo Arch,” and saw the
We crossed a street, and came presently to the former residence of St.

 The guide said it was because this was one of “the very stones of
that was approaching, and when the weary Saviour would have sat down and
useless--he walked forth out of the carnage without a wound.  And it is
amusements save that he goes sometimes to executions, and is fond of
are.  Then he collects his rent and leaves again.  He has been seen
mark upon a wall, I was filled with astonishment.  It read:
symmetry that have made this Mosque so celebrated--because I did not see
Gabriel--the prints of his monstrous fingers, two inches deep, are to be
Mohammedan would consider himself doomed to stay with the damned forever
The inside of the great mosque is very showy with variegated marble walls
Every where about the Mosque of Omar are portions of pillars, curiously
these fragments are all quaint and peculiar, and so the charm of novelty
Down in the hollow ground, underneath the olives and the orange-trees
steal a walk of a hundred yards without a guide along to talk unceasingly
have seen enough to have furnished us food for a year’s reflection if we
and history to every bank and boulder we came to: “This was the Field of
of days and days of ceaseless marching.  All were willing.
all the time for bucksheesh.  The guide wanted us to give them some
a cannon, except that the Moslems believe Mahomet will sit astride of it
little shaky.
remember only its orchard robberies, its wooden sword pageants and its
fig-tree that Jesus withered; a number of historical places about
travel which were sometimes annoying, sometimes exasperating and full as
Jordan, Jericho and the Dead Sea were suggested.  The remainder of
at breakfast.  There was a commotion about the place.  Rumors of war and
from utter destruction.  It was reported that the Consul had requested
He was forever turning up in the lead.  In such cases I trembled a
property.  The legends of the Sunday Schools do him great injustice; they
repulsive, horrible solitude!  It was the “wilderness” where John
afterwards.  There would have been scenes of riot and bloodshed there
questioned.  If he had got a Bedouin, what would he have done with him
travel under guard of vermin like this as a protection against the
We visited the fountain the prophet Elisha sweetened (it is sweet yet,)
of a rival.  It was not two hours to the Jordan.  However, we were
were in an unhappy frame of mind.  We waited and waited for daylight, but
But they did not sing long.  The water was so fearfully cold that they
It was then that Jack did them a service.  With that engaging
makes them, which is rather a complimentary stretch of fancy,) and we
solitude.  A silence broods over the scene that is depressing to the
of any thing more than a slight pricking sensation in places where their
generally for the worse.  We do our own washing.
water will soon float your feet to the surface.  You can not swim on your
four thousand miles long and thirty-five miles wide.  It is only ninety

messy towers and ramparts of vast Mars Saba looked to us when we caught a
emulation that brought about him many disciples.  The precipice on the
against all things that are pleasant to look upon, and all sounds that
later experience.  These hermits are dead men, in several respects, but
with the hermits afterward, and then sat on the lofty battlements and
is, the honest gratitude I and all pilgrims owe, to the Convent Fathers
So, rested and refreshed, we fell into line and filed away over the
stone wall and hurried on.
of the Holy Sepulchre, envy and uncharitableness were apparent here.  The
and monks compass you about, and make you think only of bucksheesh when
floor and instantly changed the darkness of the walls to its own snowy

shameless people say they were glad to get away from Ladies’ Festivals
revisit alone, the solemn monuments of the past, and summon the phantom
For about four hours we traveled down hill constantly.  We followed a
This fashion is as old as Palestine itself and was adopted in ancient
rest and sleep as long as we wanted it.  This was the plain of which

discovered any where in this book.  If the reader will call at the
Which all of us will freely grant.  But it truly is “monotonous and
Small shreds and patches of it must be very beautiful in the full flush
lips, but turns to ashes at the touch.  Nazareth is forlorn; about that
lifted above the spot where, on that most memorable day in the annals of
tradition--it is dream-land.
--and feel the temporary contentment that is born of the banishment of
They still preserved their ample buckskin seat intact; and so his short

--these old countries do not go away in the night; they stay till after

Consul’s; to the great gardens; to Cleopatra’s Needles; to Pompey’s
have they left a blemish upon us?”
unhappy.  In such circumstances people do not like to talk.
discontinuance of the effort and the closing of the office.  It was
learn now, several months after the above narrative was written, that
my note-book, now, and know that I can stand Shepherd’s Hotel, sure,
     --two inches of sallow, sorrowful, consumptive tallow candle, that
     “Fifteen! why he’s got a double lot of candles--does the man want
     “But he wants the lamp--says he’ll burn the d--d old house down if
     nose; a looking-glass split across the centre, which chopped your
     “Fifteen wants ‘em, sir.”
     a-rairin’ and a-chargin’ through this house and raise more--well,
     Consummation,” by Rev. Dr. Cummings--theology; “Revised Statutes of
CHAPTER LVIII.
because they brought back Italian reminiscences of the “old masters.”
threw their shadows down and made the air cool and bracing.  We rose to
Arrived at Old Cairo, the camp-followers took up the donkeys and tumbled
flocks and crops--but how it does all this they could not explain to us
Sultan means to build for no other reason than that when the Empress of
an arm of the Nile or an overflow, and landed where the sands of the
Of course the Sheiks said they were the only responsible parties; that
many of the steps; an Arab having hold of each of our arms and springing

dotted with villages, its vast distances measured and marked by the
try to think at all?  The thing was impossible.  One must bring his
We turned and peered over the other side--forty seconds--eighty seconds

Arab.  He pondered a moment, and would have done it, I think, but his
climbing, through the oppressive gloom, till I thought we ought to be
platoons, and paid them bucksheesh for services they swore and proved by

ever went down the Mississippi, I thought the highest bluff on the river
I had heard that such was the custom of great mountains in other parts of
perfectly magnificent, and left.  Because the coopers were starting up
the landscape, yet looking at nothing--nothing but distance and vacancy.
look so steadfastly back upon the things they knew before History was
things which, for the real benefit of Americans, ought to have prominent

whose entire inner walls are built of polished and glistening alabaster;
tired of it, too; I shall not tell about Joseph’s granaries which he
pettishly, “D--n these plebeians, they don’t burn worth a cent--pass out
pleasant landscape all through the flying journey; nor how we thundered
hapless children of Israel, but allowed them to depart out of her borders
seems forever and forever ago; that so embalmed the dead that flesh was

     “Sunday--Services, as usual, at four bells.  Services at night,
     not stop there.  Cholera.  Weather very stormy.  Many passengers
     permitted to land, though we showed a clean bill of health.  They

     “And so on, and so on, and so forth, for several days.  Finally,
     “Friday--Got up, washed, went to bed.
quarantine blockade and spent seven delightful days in Seville, Cordova,
board, and within the hour the white city and the pleasant shores of
he saw the transparent edge--by means of his extraordinary vision long
had made an egregious ass of himself before the whole ship.  He did it no

and were welcome.  We were not a nightmare here, where were civilization

land and sea, in many trying climates, without a single hurt, without a

say any thing about writing a valedictory.  I did go to the Tribune
about them, my judgment is fit for nothing.  With these remarks I
     will dance a good deal, sing a good deal, make love, but sermonize
     day, and day after day, and kept up a noisy excitement from one end
     hearty laugh was a sound that was not heard oftener than once in
     and don’t carom on any thing of any consequence, and when you are

     imagine in some unaccountable way that they had a right to be proud
     passengers said to a shopkeeper, in reference to a proposed return
     an Indian’s scalp-lock.  In France and Spain we attracted some
     we had finished our visit we variegated ourselves with selections
     through there from America, they ought to be cursed once more and
     said we preferred the wooden Indians in front of the cigar stores of
     They wouldn’t let us land at Malta--quarantine; they would not let
     shall be able to poke fun at the whole gang if the spirit so moves

was even on speaking terms with the rest of the sixty-five.  I have been

I had rasher sail with a whole brigade of patriarchs than suffer so.
feel safe and at peace and comfortable again.
as we were, and merely pausing a moment to catch fitful glimpses of the
on her stagnant flood--silent, desolate, haughty--scornful of her humbled


THE Mississippi is well worth reading about. It is not a commonplace
hundreds that are navigable by flats and keels. The area of its
The difference in rise and fall is also remarkable--not in the upper,
have elapsed since the river took its place in history. The belief of
radically changed the position, and Delta is now _two miles above_
region it used to occupy. As a result, the original _site _of that
the present--I will give a few more of them further along in the book.
To say that De Soto, the first white man who ever saw the Mississippi
Pavia; the death of Raphael; the death of Bayard, _Sans Peur Et Sans
the tournament were the frequent pastime of titled fine gentlemen who
not yet written; Shakespeare was not yet born; a hundred long years must
up in this way: After De Soto glimpsed the river, a fraction short of
and whiskey, ‘for lagniappe;’ and in Canada the French were schooling
But at last La Salle the Frenchman conceived the idea of seeking out


their five subordinates reached the junction of the Wisconsin with the
‘At length the buffalo began to appear, grazing in herds on the great
of men in the mud of the western bank--a Robinson Crusoe experience
On the rocks above the present city of Alton they found some rude and
starting-point), where a tribe of war-whooping savages swarmed out to
following of eighteen Indians brought from New England, and twenty-three
flowers, betokened the reviving life of nature.’
had just been robbed of. And also, by signs, La Salle drew from these
and by and by Napoleon himself was to give the country back again!--make
despotism, a privileged class descended from the sun, a temple and a
of the Rocky Mountains--a region of savannas and forests, sun-cracked
and time-devouring a process as the discovery and exploration had been.
by hand. A voyage down and back sometimes occupied nine months. In time
But after a while the steamboats so increased in number and in speed
of their big crews, the ex-keelboatmen and their admiringly patterning
by night, and hiding in the willows by day,--bound for Cairo,--whence
always start a good plan when you wanted one.

jumped up and says--
I’m the man they call Sudden Death and General Desolation! Sired by a
through, he jumped up and cracked his heels together three times, and
whoo-oop! I’m a child of sin, don’t let me get a start! Smoked
boundless vastness of the great American desert is my enclosed property,
went and got it and said never mind, this warn’t going to be the last
the two of ye!’
forward to man the sweeps there, and the rest went aft to handle the
next about what ought to be done with the Injuns; and next about what



soon I see a black something floating on the water away off to stabboard

‘“I don’t know.” Says I--

to lay up. This made the boys shake their heads. And every time the

the whole raft as plain as day; and the river lashed up white as milk
up on the raft, alongside of his wigwam, and wouldn’t let the dead men

mind to, and lay them before you without a jint started, anywheres. Yes,
‘_Who _was shedding tears?’ says Bob; ‘was it Allbright or the baby?’
‘Edward, did the child look like it was choked?’ says one.
bad--don’t you feel pale?’ says the Child of Calamity.
and he come rummaging around in the dark amongst the shingle bundles
‘Snake him out, boys. Snatch him out by the heels.’

‘I don’t know, sir. I’m always that way, mostly.’
in five year, and you was a baby when you come out of the bar’l, you
‘Yes, sir; it’s as true as the world; Pap he says--’
‘No, sir, I didn’t.--It was only to get a ride on the raft. All boys


its turn; but the ambition to be a steamboatman always remained.
stone-paved wharf, and the fragrant town drunkard asleep in the shadow
Drays, carts, men, boys, all go hurrying from many quarters to a common
before arriving at a town; the crew are grouped on the forecastle; the
offended him. This was distinction enough for me as a general thing; but
on the inside guard and scrub it, where we could all see him and envy
knowledge of its wonders, but the day of their glory was over now. They
followed. Boy after boy managed to get on the river. The minister’s son
pilots, but got only a cold shoulder and short words from mates and
in Cincinnati, and I set to work to map out a new career. I had
When we presently got under way and went poking down the broad Ohio,
I kept my hat off all the time, and stayed where the wind and the sun
least trifle of notice from the big stormy mate, and I was on the alert

which the average landsman would give an order, with the mate’s way
I began timidly to make up to the humblest official connected with
of art that it was an element of weakness rather than strength in his
bristled all along with incredible adventures; a narrative that was so
CHAPTER 6
was doubtless the former, since he had said his parents were wealthy,
Mississippi River with the easy confidence of my time of life. If I had
peril, but I was too wise to express it. In half a minute I had a wide
information, but I could not see the bearing of it. I was not conscious

The ‘off-watch’ was just turning in, and I heard some brutal laughter


as my cargo-room would admit of, so I held my peace. All I desired

told you.’
dunderhead I ever saw or ever heard of, so help me Moses! The idea of

you a thing, put it down right away. There’s only one way to be a pilot,
‘Jones’s plantation.’
night-work, but only a trifle. I had a note-book that fairly bristled
cramped for room: but here was a sumptuous glass temple; room enough to
on every stateroom door; she glittered with no end of prism-fringed
CHAPTER 7
it necessary to run down to Cairo to take a fresh look, when their boats
welcome because all pilots are tireless talkers, when gathered together,
I was a cipher in this august company, and felt subdued, not to say
then got my stern on the cotton-wood and head on the low place above the
‘I don’t want to find fault with your leadsmen, but that’s a good deal
At dusk Mr. Bixby tapped the big bell three times (the signal to land),
no, it reveled all through my head till sunrise again, a frantic and
behind her; so it was not customary to run down-stream at night in low
again. We were standing no regular watches. Each of our pilots ran such
sun dipped behind the horizon, the boat went on. Inquiring looks passed

‘There; she’s over the first reef all right!’
held one’s heart still. Presently I discovered a blacker gloom than

pilot-house before!
bargain.
head full of islands, towns, bars, ‘points,’ and bends; and a curiously
and then went on loading and firing until he was out of adjectives.
‘How do you follow a hall at home in the dark. Because you know the

in reality there is a curve there), and that wall falls back and makes

So that question was answered. Here were leagues of shore changing
‘Mark three’ is three fathoms.]} with the other.’
Bixby gave him no greeting whatever, but simply surrendered the wheel
to sleep while this lunatic was on watch.
of an ass than any creature I ever saw before. What did you suppose he

bank! If there had been a conspicuous dead tree standing upon the very
hurry, or I’ll bang this boat’s brains out against a rock; and then the
fashion--
mixed up with the shoal soundings and marks of another, either, for

Bixby seemed to think me far enough advanced to bear a lesson on

she fights strong and the tiller slips a little, in a jerky, greasy sort
too late. The boat had ‘smelt’ the bar in good earnest; the foamy ridges

it wove itself together like a spider’s web; the boat answered and
cigar--we were just in the act of climbing an overhanging big tree,
‘When you have a hail, my boy, you ought to tap the big bell three times
bluff reef.’
‘All right; I am taking the responsibility.’ I was just as anxious to

_italicized _passage; indeed, it was more than that, it was a legend of
restored to me while I lived. All the grace, the beauty, the poetry had
woody heights, soft distances; and over the whole scene, far and near,
it keeps on stretching out like that; those tumbling ‘boils’ show a
above some deadly disease. Are not all her visible charms sown thick
preceded this may possibly wonder that I deal so minutely with piloting
time referred to; not true now (1882).]} I feel justified in enlarging
side of my head, and wearing a tooth-pick in my mouth at the wheel. Mr.
‘I don’t know; I never noticed.’
you’d stir those leadsmen up a bit. There was a ten-foot bank here last
after the river is done rising. Now the bank will tell you about this.
‘But 103 is a long way up the river yet.’
everlasting measuring of the banks of this river, twelve hundred miles,
where you’ve always thought was solid land; we’ll dart through the woods
‘Ah, I never can learn it.’
to know your banks and marks to a dead moral certainty, and never get

only stop the engines, and one wheel would walk over that log from one
‘Posey County,’ Indiana, freighted with ‘fruit and furniture’--the
would send and receive a tempest of missiles and profanity, one of our
then, of course; and as we backed and filled to get away, the precious
a particularly cramped place in a chute, we would be pretty sure to meet
steamboating days. Indeed they did. Twenty times a day we would be
impartially divided up among twelve raftsmen’s crews, who have pulled a
spendthrift richness of the forest foliage, were wasted and thrown away
to cook and eat and sleep for a lesser or greater number of days (or
completely bridged by a great fallen tree. This will serve to show how
is shorn off clear to the rear of the plantations, from two to four
see how she will feel. And see how you will feel, too! You find yourself
novelty about it; it had often been done before.
whether he had not better have X. called to assist in running the place,
you how to do it.’
mistake of mine.’
tremendous head of steam, went swinging over the reef and away into deep
A minute later Ealer was biting into a pie, down in the ‘texas,’ and
power, and held his breath while the boat reluctantly swung away from

water’ there is in the channel,--or a few inches more, as was often
whistle signals are seldom necessary, however; never, perhaps, except
higher up or lower down, he removes the buoy to that place. Being
glorious summer day, or a blustering night. But in winter the cold and
a swift yawl; there is something fine about the exultant spring of the

her thwarts were cushioned; she carried twelve oarsmen; one of the mates
‘Now just for that, you can go and get the sounding-pole yourself. I was
with the sounding-pole which I had been sent on a fool’s errand to

seized the bell-ropes, rang a startling peal, and exclaimed--
the guard, and were hauled aboard. The next moment the sounding-yawl
leaning over and staring into the gloom; and every faint and fainter cry
The yawl crew searched everywhere, but found no sign of the two men.
to wait some time, he and the officer got to talking; he looked up when

in New York, and travel up and down it, conning its features patiently
pilot’s peerless memory by the fickle Mississippi.
valuable package of them all! Take an instance. Let a leadsman cry,
requiring any assistance from him in the matter. If you were walking
that same man at noon what he had had for breakfast, it would be ten
him, I think, not built. For instance, somebody would mention a name.
things a week afterward in New Orleans; he was first mate of the
memory; its grasp was universal. If he were talking about a trifling
anecdote about a dog. He would be ‘so full of laugh’ that he could
four hours’ tedious jaw, the watch would change, and Brown would go out
The growth of courage in the pilot-house is steady all the time, but it
more calmly. A favorite way of theirs is to play a friendly swindle upon
bend above island 66, brimful of self-conceit and carrying my nose as
church steeple.’
captain glanced aloft at me and said, with a sham uneasiness in his
both together--
‘M-a-r-k three!... M-a-r-k three... Quarter less three!... Half twain!’

to learn something by that experience. Didn’t you _know _there was no

independent human being that lived in the earth. Kings are but the
sole and unquestioned control of the pilot. He could do with her exactly
easily be guessed, considering the pilot’s boundless authority, that he
wharves of St. Louis and New Orleans, and every soul on board was hard
Missouri village, they were sought by the best and the fairest, and
divide!’
up and threw that into his voice which showed that he knew he was not
through a broken pane and shouted (very willing that the neighbors
fascinating--but not to everybody. He made a trip with good old Captain
fiddle, and a cat. He played execrably. This seemed to distress the cat,

of rashness, and so he managed to hold his peace. He chafed and puzzled
‘Yes, I reckon it is; but a body can’t be too careful with a steamboat.

The captain surrendered.
kept still as long as he could, but finally broke down and shouted from
and likewise described the rank which the pilot held among the
steersman had made an amount of progress that was satisfactory to any
special charter from the legislature, with large powers, under the name
children. Also, the said deceased would be buried at the association’s
association for taking all the worthless pilots out of the way and
for they were good pilots; the incompetent ones had all been absorbed
offered! So there was a still bitterer pill to be swallowed: they must

‘Yes.’
‘Of course that is a matter between you and Mr. S----, captain. We

one--the United States mail service. It was the letter-bag lock, a

thoroughly, returned them to the box, and went back aboard his boat
association men; and then the two steamers ranged alongside and all

up the brag, until one black day when every captain of the lot was
pursue, and they pursued it. They came forward in couples and groups,
They remained idle a long while, because of course nobody could venture
had to send in six hundred and twenty-five dollars with his application.
masters and adopted by the association. The president and secretary

Incredible as it may seem, the owners and captains deliberately did it
too, and move for another advance in freights. It was a novel idea,
monopoly in the world, perhaps, and seemed simply indestructible.

the jack-staff, and sometimes a duplicate on the verge staff astern.
half-naked crews of perspiring negroes that worked them were roaring
spring shoreward over his head.
In the old times, whenever two fast boats started out on a race, with a
it several weeks in advance, and from that time forward, the whole
half feet forward and five feet aft, she was carefully loaded to that
The chosen date being come, and all things in readiness, the two great
seconds, two mighty choruses burst forth--and here they come! Brass
you can tell which one is on watch by noting whether that boat has
way. She was dismally slow; still, we often had pretty exciting times
minutes.{footnote [Time disputed. Some authorities add 1 hour and 16

crooked, that being a rocky country which the river cannot cut much.
away out yonder on a big island; the old watercourse around it will soon
Raccourci cut-off was made (forty or fifty years ago, I think). This



foolish to try the cut-off. However, Mr. Brown was ambitious, and he
lightning flashes one could see the plantation cabins and the goodly
usual way, the pilots not knowing that the cut-off had been made. It was
In the absence of further statistics, I beg to close this chapter with
bills, Stephen was there! His silvery tongue began to wag, and in a very
no use; his debtor would run him down and corner him. Panting and
without rest or food; my wife says, “Where have you been all night?”
standing here on this ground on this particular brick,--there, I’ve
long-lost brother.
his hand upon Yates’s head, added, ‘I am going to pay them off in
CHAPTER 18
judge of men--no, it has not done that; for judges of men are born, not
my soul became lead in my body the moment I approached the pilot-house.
me deliberately and painstakingly from head to heel for about--as
himself to me in any other way than ‘Here!’ and then his command
inquest. When the leads had been laid in, he resumed--
ejaculated, ‘Well, I’ll be dod derned!’ and returned to his wheel.
‘You’ve had no _orders_! My, what a fine bird we are! We must have

have said, I soon got the habit of coming on duty with dread. The moment
Then he would jump from the bench, snatch the wheel from me, and meet
sometimes it seemed to me that Ritchie’s good-natured badgering was
Brown was _always _watching for a pretext to find fault; and if he could
snarly way--
to fetch the boat around. Brown’s chance was come.

care of it; so I kept still.
‘Didn’t _you _hear him?’ asked the captain of me.

leave the pilot-house; out with you!’
very natural solicitude, for, all this time, here was this steamboat
vituperation, of course; but he was not equipped for this species of
confronted me! I dropped my head, and he stood over me in silence a


‘What did you do?’
thrashing, do you hear? I’ll pay the expenses. Now go--and mind you, not


on the captain of the ‘A. T. Lacey,’ for a passage to St. Louis, and
stick to the boat, and give such minor service as chance might throw in
Further up the river we got a later extra. My brother was again
it was said at the time--and not very many of them were astir. The wood
had disappeared; and the stupefied barber, who was also unhurt,
patiently hunted out each and every one of his chessmen and the several
which was only a few hundred yards away; but Henry presently said he

all kinds, and there they remained and nursed the wounded. All the
injuriously affected by seeing one of their number in the death-agony.
he would come to a sitting posture and shout, ‘Hump yourselves, _hump
tempted him almost beyond his strength; but he mastered himself and

I had to seek another livelihood. So I became a silver miner in Nevada;

inquire, and spy around, as I should be if unknown; I remembered that it
We left per Pennsylvania Railroad, at 8 A.M. April 18.
those people for New-Yorkers. No, there is a godless grace, and snap,
their breeches pockets; it was observable, heretofore, that one hand
down the Mississippi--they became the rule. They disappeared from other
and unfair it is: wicked impostors go around lecturing under my _Nom
The most notable absence observable in the billiard-room, was the
crying. Rogers was not his name; neither was Jones, Brown, Dexter,
turbulent, bank-caving Missouri, and every tumblerful of it holds nearly
little changed. It _was _greatly changed, but it did not seem so;
whereas the dwellings of a former day are packed together in blocks,
every hand into dim, measure-defying distances, and remember that I had
exclamation--‘By--, they look exactly like bed-posts!’ St. Louis is
woeful. The absence of the pervading and jocund steamboatman from the
The towboat and the railroad had done their work, and done it well and
ragged negroes, some drinking, some drunk, some nodding, others
steamboats consumed a week in doing; and the towing-fleets have killed
stretched from the one city to the other, along the banks, and he sold
the short packet lines. It was an easy plan to make, and would have been
suited for grapes, with a southern exposure and a little subsoiling. The
leave at 5 P.M. We took passage in her for Memphis, and gave up the idea
They don’t drink it, sir. They can’t drink it, sir. Give an Irishman
profanity-mill adjusted to begin the preparatory services. Why this new
We put ashore a well-dressed lady and gentleman, and two well-dressed,
too, and deserved a better fate. It was settled by the French, and is a
that I had never seen him before; so I went up there. The pilot


marvelous eccentricities of one sort and another, and backed them up

we didn’t get aground on alligators.’
few pilots that could judge of alligator water nearly as well as they
knows himself, without going around backing up other people’s say-so’s,
the last you hear of _him_. He wouldn’t come back for pie. If there’s
of treason--lucky duck if they don’t hang you, too. And they will, if

wages; but said I, What’s wages when your reputation’s in danger? So I
her go; it was all you had to do. She would hold herself on a star


forgotten the river, but I hadn’t forgotten how to steer a steamboat,
satisfactory despatch.
Elbow and the Devil’s Race-course, and lots of other property of his
Uncle Mumford’s final observation that ‘people who make lime run more to
religious than the other hill towns with the same slope and built of the

And the greatly improved aspect of the boat’s staff is another advantage
Mumford. He said she had a gray mare aboard, and a preacher. To me,
preacher overboard, or we should not have arrived at all. The preacher
I do not even remember what part of the river it used to be in,
steamboat. The perilous ‘Graveyard,’ among whose numberless wrecks
the hidden rock which used to lie right in the way has moved up stream
per Mr. Dickens’s portrait of it. However, it was already building with
out of her hands by ‘collaring it along the line without gathering it at
of their element in that kind of business at first, but afterward got
It was the 7th of November. The fight began at seven in the morning. I
was sitting with my legs hanging out of the pilot-house window. All at
the bell to set her back; raised up and took a look, and I saw about
tell me the truth. Where did you go when you went to see that battle?’
A plain story, straightforwardly told; but Mumford told me that that
the worst one was between the Darnells and the Watsons. Nobody don’t
going to get hurt--only question was, which of them got the drop on
the wall, handy, and then all hands would join in with the prayer and
followed along the bank and kept on shooting at him; and when he struck
and comfort, was a man of good parts, and was college bred. His loose

important place, for it commanded the situation; and, being heavily
grown nor diminished in size. It was said that the recent high water had
them. The properties of multitudes of people were under water for
WE met two steamboats at New Madrid. Two steamboats in sight at once! an
them--a procession which kept up its plodding, patient march through the

desolate as this entrance of the Mississippi. Had Dante seen it, he
large masses of soil with all their growth, and there forming islands,
fertility in its course; not one that the eye loves to dwell upon as
stream now loaded with the masses of soil which nourished their roots,
imagine it a devil, whose energies have been only overcome by the
myself afloat upon its waters. How often in my schoolboy dreams, and in
of the deluge, would here have found them in abundance.’
voiceless, lonely as when born of chaos, without a sail, without a sign
LOUIS LE GRAND, ROY DE FRANCE ET DE NAVARRE, REGNE; LE NEUVIEME AVRIL,

Noted a big change in the river, at Island 21. It was a very large
help, after she has been through once. Lamps in such places are of
you; so was it also, when you were groping your way through solidified
And now in these new days, these days of infinite change, the Anchor
from the fleet of the United States River Commission, and from a village
here, or Go there, and make it obey; cannot save a shore which it has
I consulted Uncle Mumford concerning this and cognate matters; and I
‘As long as I have been mate of a steamboat--thirty years--I have
Devil’s Island, in the Upper River, they wanted the water to go one way,
with that coal-oil, now, lively, lively!_ And just look at what they are
way, where a man can afford it, is to copper the operation, and at the
unrighteousness, heirs of perdition! going to be a year getting that
river’s bottom will rise; and that consequently the levee system is a
not going to meet two people sick of the same theory, one right after
sure; but at the same time he will cure you of any other of the five
since then the appropriation has been made--possibly a sufficient one,
‘The towboat “Jos. B. Williams” is on her way to New Orleans with a
When a river in good condition can enable one to save $162,000 and a
Massacres are sprinkled with some frequency through the histories of
instead of down, and cutting off, throughout, some fifteen miles of
comprehensive vileness and shamelessness; and very much his superior
When he traveled, his usual disguise was that of an itinerant preacher;
their employers; sometimes they would be sold in this manner three or
circumstances This will be easily understood when it is stated that he

Council as published by Stewart, that every attempt was made to throw
houses in that place, and we sat in council three days before we got all
stopped. I hitched his horse, and then made him undress himself, all to
the last five days.
Crenshaw said he knew a place to hide him, and he gathered him under his
upwards of five hundred dollars; and then stole him and delivered him
Commodore of the Confederate fleet. Both saw a great deal of active
for the town’s sewerage system, which is called perfect; a recent
hundreds fell a sacrifice to the terrible epidemic. The city was become

A thriving place is the Good Samaritan City of the Mississippi: has
around rearward toward the woods; and now and then a pig, and no end of
military and judicial titles of that old day of cheap shams and windy

keeper of the light must come in a skiff a great distance to discharge
people could never travel when they were slaves; so they make up for
big, old and young, roosting on the scant pile of household goods; these
him one trip--a poor old broken-down, superannuated fellow--left him at
‘Any boat gone up?’
a-_sparklin_’!’
Further gossip;--after which, everybody went below to get afternoon
things, and inhospitably amusing himself at the expense of an innocent
of unappeasable laughter. He must have made himself sick; for he was

committing that wanton and silly impoliteness.
you have one of the fairest and softest pictures imaginable. You have
strange and tragic accident in the old times, Captain Poe had a small
of recent birth--Arkansas City. It was born of a railway; the Little

the flood (or possibly the seepage) had lately been ravaging it; whole
in bright new clothes of swell and elaborate style and cut--a glaring

I got my friends into my stateroom, and said I was sorry to create

of fresh flowers, all but their faces and crossed hands. Around a finger

eager--and the next moment he and I were alone together.

history--for you will see Napoleon, Arkansas; and for my sake you
for the child--’


struck, it seemed as if years had gone by since I had heard it last. All
would find the debtor and collect the debt. How accomplish this, do you
regiments were in camp, and two companies of U.S. cavalry. When I
but I gave Company C the great bulk of my attentions. I made myself
offered.
the only sure thing,’ said he; ‘you can’t disguise that.’ And he used
Adler. An hour before, I did not know the murderer’s name, or voice,
minutes he kept pouring out the same set of words, like a demented
desert, and get away with it all. It is gold, and too heavy to carry
again. Say nothing to Adler about this thing--say nothing to anybody.’
heart! _Ya wohl_, laughed I, it _was _the tragedy part of his fortune,
Four years ago, my health began to fail. I had wandered into Munich, in
that dead-bell rang out a blood-curdling alarum over my head! The shock
it must have been to wake up in the midst of that voiceless hush, and,
‘Shout, Franz Adler; make the sleepers in the distant streets hear you
Shout, man, shout!--it is the one sole chance between you and eternity!
anguish in my victim’s face. I was disturbed, disquieted. I said--
Negative shake of the head.

did it partly because I saw, that along at first, whenever I reached
and my child; and in three days hence he will have added me to his list.
his support, ever since.

man of him, and I shall sleep the sounder in my grave for knowing that I
over the strange incidents of the tale; and this, along with a rattling


everything, then I don’t know human nature--ain’t that so, Thompson?
his bread with the appetite which laborious industry alone can
him undisturbed. That is real friendship, that is true friendship. We

permit--
The captain glanced up at the pilot-house and said--

hide nor hair, shred nor shingle of it, except the fag-end of a shanty


or wrong, this _fact _remains: that here is this big and exceedingly
the gray and grassless banks--cabins which had formerly stood a quarter
a grandson of the statesman, went to Boston and formed a syndicate
takes some risk and demands big interest--usually 10 per cent., and
profit, $150, or $15 per acre. There is also a profit now from
with him, no sentiment permitted to intrude, will not keep a ‘store’
protective treatment of its laborers, that its method is the most
down and sells them for fifty. ‘Why does he mix such elaborate and
it unless you’ve made your will.’ It isn’t as it used to be in the
CHAPTER 34
unworldly, for a river man. Among other things, he said that Arkansas
kill him--‘butcher him,’ as he expressed it. Referred in a sort of
down--you get a leetle too much costumery on to your statements: always

war experiences; earthworks, trees crippled by the cannon balls,
acres of world-wide news to be read at breakfast, mornings--a tedious
is cobwebbed with the crisscrossing red lines streaming from soaring
home presently, or take a lounge through the town, if the stillness
an experience which multitudinously bristles with striking novelties;
eloquent for ever perhaps; but they had six weeks of it, and that wore
over with dirt, and a piece of the iron carried away her game-bag of
the streets, looking as cheerful as you please, and keeping an eye
pretty good turnouts. I’ve seen service stop a minute, and everybody sit
scarce as diamonds, and we had only just that little; never had another
and caved it in and stopped it up. It was lively times, for a while,
full of incident, full of the picturesque. Vicksburg held out longer
piece of native wild-wood, left just as it grew, and, therefore, perfect
the marble monument has been removed to the National Cemetery.

diligently and effectively discouraged it. They could have had many
conversation which began with talk about horses, drifted into talk
in case anybody wanted it done. I had a contract to survey a route for a
rid of him without running some chance of hurting his feelings, and I
everything I knew about my trade, my tribe, my purposes, my prospects,
me, and a sadness to him.
so? Well, you can do me a good turn, and so can I you, if we see fit.

mistake.
‘But it ain’t any use, gentlemen; I tell you again, as I’ve told you a

now that he had got a taste of it he almost believed he would drink it
with my prayers. At last we went booming through the Golden Gate, and my
One villain--named Hank Wiley--discarded one card, the others three
‘Cover it? Well, I reckon I am--and lay another hundred on top of it,
table, and said with mocking gentleness--
Down went the anchor, rumbledy-dum-dum! and the long trip was ended.

A TERRIBLE DISASTER.
A list of the names followed, whereby it appeared that of the seventeen
CHAPTER 38
with the crown jewels; or with the Taj, or with the Matterhorn; or with
had a best dwelling, finest dwelling, mansion,--the home of its
and ‘Affection’s Wreath,’ with their sappy inanities illustrated
wall by the door, copy of it done in thunder-and-lightning crewels by
the premises, sometimes in colored yarns, sometimes in faded grasses:
persons all fresh, raw, and red--apparently skinned. Opposite, in
who crossed the Plains; three ‘alum’ baskets of various colors--being
doubt by stripes and splashes of vivid gold bronze; all of them too much
feather-bed--not aired often enough; cane-seat chairs, splint-bottomed
furnished with Windsor armchairs; inside, a far-receding snow-white
be told from mosquito netting by an expert--though generally these
has steamboat furniture and ornamentation undergone any.
magnify itself into a dense forest by-and-bye, and completely hide the

regions that are naturally tributary to her. And like Vicksburg and New
Sunk into the floor were numberless tin boxes, a foot square and two
dinner-tables, to cool the tropical air; and also to be ornamental, for
feet; added machinery to increase the capacity to 10,300 spindles and
listened--two men were talking; subject, apparently, the great
oleomargarine! Yes, sir, that’s what it is--oleomargarine. You can’t
them.’
up and quit.’
labels: been buying them abroad--get them dirt-cheap there. You see,
said--

clustered together in the middle distance--were in view. And there was a
and locomotives; and traces of its inflated language and other windy
‘The Institute building has long been famed as a model of striking and
Female college sounds well enough; but since the phrasing it in that
{footnote [Illustrations of it thoughtlessly omitted by the advertiser:
bank, got a shot gun, took deliberate aim at General Mabry and fired.
pierced by buckshot. The affair caused great excitement, and Gay Street
Professor’s course met with pretty general approval in the community;
apology; Dick refused to give it, and it was agreed that a duel was
sides of the river all the way, and stretch their league-wide levels

look. It is the blight of the war. Twenty-one years ago everything was
honest, intelligent, gentle, manly, charitable, well-meaning Capt. Basil
Orleans region, the water is up to the top of the enclosing levee-rim,
The vast reach of plank wharves remained unchanged, and there were as
street-cars, and--toward evening--its broad second-story verandas
in Boston and Chicago. The ‘burnt district’ of Boston was commonplace
city’s architecture is like the contrast between waking and sleep.
of five miles of river frontage. There are good clubs in the city
One may with sorrow contrast this with the architecture of New Orleans.
cask, painted green, and sometimes a couple of stories high, which

Fresh flowers, in vases of water, are to be seen at the portals of many
reputation. They change color when a person comes along and hangs up
now, after nineteen hundred years, gone to curing the sick by the dozen.
‘Dr. F. Julius Le Moyne, after fifty years of medical practice, wrote:
of cemeteries seemed to aggravate the disease.
in the United States than the Government expends for public-school
would do by-and-bye. The adoption of cremation would relieve us of a
He and his family will feel that outlay a good many months.

two or three little old coffins and a hired hearse, and now look at the
take in walnut if he can go mahogany; and won’t take in mahogany if he
‘“And fhat might ye ask for that wan?”
‘“D’ye mane to soy that Bridget O’Shaughnessy bought the mate to that
hacks so, on their funerals, that a funeral left them ragged and hungry
‘Think.’

your embamming traps around you and go to work; and in a couple of hours

and there a departure from it with pleasant effect; all are plastered

rim of wide vague horizons of Alps with an inspired and enlightened
of it; the one dim with religious light, the other brilliant with the
forget what he became.
thresholds. We had dinner on a ground-veranda over the water--the
soft-shell crabs of a most superior breed. The other dishes were what
those thoroughfares would bear a greatly improved aspect in a very few

would have made it tell that this is Lee and Jackson’s last interview if
on. The words may lack charm to the eye, in print, but they have it to
you been at?’ And here is the aggravated form--heard a ragged street
so common--so nearly universal, in fact--that if she had used ‘whither’

of coffee down the back of your neck, he says ‘For lagniappe, sah,’ and
field at all. So the chances are four to two, or five to one, that the
since the waw; or du’in’ the waw; or befo’ the waw; or right aftah the
some listener of something that happened during the war--and out he
now the moon, as a topic, will be shelved.’
waw!”’

cocks were brought in in sacks; and when time was called, they were


him. No, he would have said ‘the beauty and the chivalry of Galilee’
with him. They accepted and came aboard, and the steamboat shoved out
destructive of compactness of statement.
a delay. The oaks shook off long tresses of their mossy beards to the
as long as the women stay out of it. But when they intrude, we have this
Arthur’s gala-days.’
attend so humble an orgy as a mule-race, the thing is explained now. It
had a distinct opinion of his own as to how the race ought to be run,
steamboats raging along, neck-and-neck, straining every nerve--that is
CHAPTER 46
this king nor any of his great following of subordinates is known to any

two compensating benefactions: the Revolution broke the chains of the
the sillinesses and emptinesses, sham grandeurs, sham gauds, and sham
mixed, and the South would be fully a generation further advanced than
did the Southerner of the Civil War: but the former resembles the latter

dozen or two--and will have them when Sir Walter’s time is out.
Uncle Remus and Mr. Cable
public I am but talking to his personal friends, and these things are
against even this sagacious strategy, so we had to read about Brer
sensitive citizens of New Orleans. His names were either inventions or
‘It was twenty years ago; his name has probably carried him off before

thirty-five years old, and come back at the end of twenty-one years and
Six miles below town a fat and battered brick chimney, sticking above
required spot; then it stands still and by means of a wire rope pulls
year’s loss will not matter. These troublesome and expensive scientific
remove the alcohol; then through the clarifying tanks to discharge the

He applied it to every sentimental remark, and to every pathetic song.
dollars; from New York to St. Louis, three cents. I remember Mr.
QUESTION. Where are you?


Q. What do you drink?


Q. Then this one has actually forgotten the date of its translation to
you die a natural death, or were you cut off by a catastrophe?
tadpole--and this advice is religiously followed by the receivers. One
of my former friends who had quitted the river, four had chosen farming
anybody with their successes. Their farms do not support them: they
explained that his share was not reached. The farm produced only two
was not the case. The captain was very strict; therefore I knew better
the same way again in like circumstances.
well worth while to put it in italics, too.
He had been urged to fly sooner, but had replied as became a pilot to
another and very particular friend, whom I had steered many trips for,
started out for recreation. He ranged the whole boat--visited every part
the wheel, and disabled. The water was very cold; he clung to a cotton
Johnson, but who shall be called George Johnson for the purposes of this
The distant relatives flocked in and exposed the fraudful date with
was a fine man, a high-minded man, and greatly respected both ashore and
first steamboat trip, which was said to be 1811, the year the first
‘In 1827 we find him on board the “President,” a boat of two hundred and
low-pressure steamer “Natchez.”
‘In 1839 Great Horseshoe cut-off formed.
make the new men feel their newness to the sharpest degree possible,

The old gentleman was not of literary turn or capacity, but he used
of it, in the captain’s own hand, has been sent to me from New Orleans.
or a thousand words. I was a ‘cub’ at the time. I showed my performance
distinction to be hated by him, because he loved scores of people; but
cemetery, St. Louis. It is his image, in marble, standing on duty at
Reminiscences
would take the wheel now; and he did. Captain Bixby stepped into the
The next morning I came on with the four o’clock watch, and saw Ritchie
tempest coming, and everybody left the pilot-house but me. The wind bent
effects which enchanted the eye and sent electric ecstasies of mixed
On this up trip I saw a little towhead (infant island) half a mile long,
effect was always produced: hundreds of birds flocked instantly out
cub was there, and the histrionic poison entered his bones. This
that night, and if I should come I would see him. _If_ I should come! I

like themselves?’
And this is what came of that fleeting visit of those young Englishmen

against the rioters, under command of a military man. We drilled till
all right or not. I ought to have inquired, thirty years ago; I know
mutilated them. It cannot be that there are more than 150,000 Catholics

explanations, however. The letter is written by an ex-thief and
thought; his early training asserted itself with power, and wrought with
persons, and eventually it fell into the hands of those ladies of whom I
i did not cair for what you said, & at the first go off I didn’t, but i
a square bloke, for months on your word, but forgot it when i saw the
amen; & i kept a thinking, of it over and over as i went along--about an
head just then to ask him for work; & i asked him to take back the bill
bible instead of papers & books--Well Charlie i thought i had better
understand my bible better.
cant do it yet--you no i learned to read and write while prisons & i
way--next week Mr. Brown takes me into his store as lite porter & will
treats me as kind as they can--Mr. Brown is going to write to you
with it. He was practising upon me to see if there was any hope of his
northern British neighbors, and carried this sermon with him, since he
the hearts of all the nations for a thousand years to come, and nobody
got copies of the letter, with permission to circulate them in writing,

Rev.--------



here. All letters received are carefully read by officers of the prison
aforetime same old drought set in in the churches. As a rule, the town
That ‘nub’ is so ingeniously, so casually, flung in, and immediately
that it was the most remarkable one I had ever encountered. And it

clearly recognize the place. This seemed odd to me, for when I retired
memory of it as I had known it when I first quitted it twenty-nine
a comprehensive view. The whole town lay spread out below me then, and I
to make, for the eight hundred miles of river between St. Louis and St.
him various questions; first about a mate of mine in Sunday school--what
whipped him in every battle, straight along, and he died in one of the
finally died there, without a cent to buy a shroud, and without a friend
‘The first two live here, are married and have children; the other is

fool they’ll never find it out. There’s one thing sure--if I had a
I mentioned a great number of people whom I had formerly known. Some
a small boy, at the time; and I saw those giddy young ladies come
told this candid gentleman, in the beginning, that my name was Smith.
but of special orders, and were freighted with very precise and distinct
down again and a splitting peal of thunder followed, which seemed to
fairly warmed out of him. I knew that this would be only just and fair.
although Tom Holmes says more bad words than any other boy in the
It was a long night to me, and perhaps the most distressful one I
day, if I survived to see its sun appear. I resolved to cease from sin

memory. One Sunday he made himself the envy of all the youth and the
at him.’ Treacherous winks were exchanged, and all said ‘All right,


be resuscitated, but we never thought of that. We did not think of
knows three thousand verses by heart is not satisfactory, what chance is
Breakfast time approached while I mused these musings and called these
Sunday-school scholar; and I found the locality easily enough, but not
early ages, recognized me, and I talked a flutter of wild nonsense to
merely to get a chance to inspect; and as I strung out the random

adjusted to the changed state of things. I met young ladies who did not
There was a saddler whom I wished to see; but he was gone. Dead, these

I eagerly said I could.
The effect which this had upon me was an inspiration to him, and he
by and by enabled me to note two things: that he had killed his victims
in love’s young dream,’ gave no weight to the threat, but led his
‘The cross of the Mysterious Avenger is known in Europe, in America,
then, I took his inventions for truth, and did not suspect that he was a
The carpenter blustered, flourished his knife, and doomed this Lynch in
seldom seen, that one doubts them when he does see them. The customary
and fever in its day. I remember one summer when everybody in town had

delirium tremens and spontaneous combustion. When I say natural death, I
the marshal--large name for a constable, but that was his title. At two
that in this position the fires wrapped him about and consumed him. As
looks, gestures, glances of the eye which had no significance, but which
I came to a sitting posture in an instant, with my kidneys in my throat
sleep while I’ve got a chance.’
forgot to tell him it was loaded, and--’
because it was loaded, and he went off and shot himself with that
I should have to set out the real case--there seemed to be no other
‘Yes, wish I may die in my tracks.’

next. I believed I knew what it would be, and I was right. He said--
‘You told it in your sleep.’

notice--the surprising spread which longitudinal time undergoes there.

now, as formerly, interested in art, letters, and other high things.
and lawns, fine mansions, stately blocks of commercial buildings. And
semblance of a town lot, no matter how situated, was salable, and at a

intellectual hand on it whenever it was wanted.

dozen persons present. It was the scarecrow Dean--in foxy shoes, down at
started--laughter, this time. It was followed by another, then a
the coat; and then for an untimed period stood there, like another
to forbid the manufacture, exportation, importation, purchase, sale,
dens which usually do duty as theaters in cities of Burlington’s size.
the matter and saved my skin whole. Shortly afterward, he went to visit

school, a college, a library, and a newspaper; and they live under law.
Louis.
Minneapolis had just a third as many. The then population of Minneapolis
cheering to the spirit; and they are all situated upon hills. Therefore
towns--one of the thirteen which fret the Mississippi and the pilots,
and presently reach Dubuque, which is situated in a rich mineral region.
a band of Indians, in early times, and cooped them up there, with death
stage, and therefore dimmed and blurred by the mud manufactured from
it--nothing to hang a fret or a worry upon.
boat was a steamboat clerk before these roads were built. In that day
‘Captain says--
now. Eight years ago a boat used to go up the river with every stateroom
along by a powerful stern-wheeler, modern fashion, and the small
thirteen thousand population, with electric lighted streets, and with
settlers, and was familiar with every part of it. Pardonably proud of
the frame that’s wanted; you always want a strong frame, you know, to
But no matter what I began to suspect. Hear him--
feet; then just before landing at Minnieska our attention is attracted
river widens, and a most charming and magnificent view of the valley



lover belonging to the same band. But her stern parents had promised her
looking for. It is a distinct improvement upon the threadbare form of
I was glad to hear the lecturer’s description of the scenery, for it
Schoolcraft’s book, published near fifty years ago, and now doubtless
I have found the book. The lecturer was right. There are several legends

filled it with tobacco, rendered mild by a mixture of certain leaves,
‘I shake my ringlets,’ rejoined the young man, ‘and warm showers of
sun increased, he grew less and less in stature, and anon had melted

together in solid blocks of honest brick and stone, and has the air of
he is peculiarly strong in the matter of commerce. Last year his jobbing
praiseful thought to its humble builder, whose rich heart and withered
offered from its streets.
the gambler, the desperado, the highwayman, and all their kindred in sin
occupies, in June 1837. Yes, at that date, Pierre Parrant, a Canadian,
able to tell where the one Siamese twin leaves off and the other begins.
of flour every year; twenty sawmills produce two hundred million feet
six thousand pupils and one hundred and twenty-eight teachers. There
Lake is the resort. Connected with White-bear Lake is a most idiotic
the maiden loved the warrior. He had again and again been refused her
has a heart to love, and in this pride he is as noble as in his own
blanket with her into the great arms of the ferocious monster. Instantly
That night there was no more sleep for the band or the lovers, and as
him--apparently, for she was up the tree--resumes her place in the
It is hopeless for the occasional visitor to try to keep up with


twenty feet square, and in front of an improvised shelter earth had been

along the banks were stripped of their leaves. One man, whom your
island.
for the stock, and she pointed to a house near by with water three
the squirrel can be heard in this solitude. Sometimes a morose gar
study, could an artist only hold it down to his canvas. The motion of
negro quarters anchored in confusion against some oak, and the modest
Natchez on the Mississippi across to the pine hills of Louisiana, a
After a short stop we started, and soon came to a section where there
At half-past twelve o’clock a hail was given from a flat-boat inside the
eighteen inches higher than in 1874, and there was no land between
crowded with stock, all of which was thin and hardly able to stand up.
supply of feed for cattle. On the opposite side of Little River, which
and soon regained some strength. To-day we go on Little River, where the
floors. In one of the large rooms were huddled the horses and cows of
feeble health, whilst at the door were her seven children, the oldest
they were in. These are but two instances of the many. After weeks of
arriving, bringing information of stock in other places in need.
to late at night he is going this way and that, cheering by his
Hooper, seven in number, who could not longer remain in their dwelling,
is greater than they can meet with promptness. All are working night and
versed in the production of this section.

the necessity of pledging their crops in advance even of planting, at
It does not need technical or scientific knowledge to comprehend the

with the forms of these shelter dykes, their arrangements so as to

Under the general principle that the local slope of a river is the
had been accompanied by revetment of banks, and made complete, we should
sensational propositions have commended themselves only to unthinking
part to attempt to present the facts relating to an enterprise which

applied told me that he had had a few copies before he understood the
of some judgment, utter their opinions upon this. I never heard of any
from beginning to end (which is an assertion I heard made very nearly as
the conviction of this singular people that they cannot be seen without
statement throughout the work is by no means saying enough. It is
imperfections on its head, as I and my family too often had.
Hall had not placed a firm restraint on himself, he must have given

APPENDIX D
the implements with which we kindle our fires. Go some distance from our
is not at home, and I will stay but a moment to catch hold of it. She
colors. As soon as the inflammation reaches my breast, you will take my
as usual, and it would command its sister to go in such places as it
were, and that he had called them together to know if they would
in his demands for his moccasins. Several times his wife asked him the
the rear. One day, running suddenly forward, he gave the
still,’ once more said the leader; ‘he to whom I am leading you is not
mishemokwa and a manito. It is he who has that we prize so dearly (i.e.
back, they saw the monster slowly rising. He stood some time before he
depths of his stomach, and what is called _checaudum_. Getting upon a
black dogs, he placed them before him. ‘These are the ones I use when I
could do nothing for their safety. All were silent. The leader, running
stumbled. Renewing the attempt with the other war-club, that also was
pressed, I came to a large lake, on the shore of which was a canoe,

again shook, and soon they saw the monster hard after them. Their
One day the sister saw the eyes of the head brighten, as if with
all these articles, one by one, and say to him, “This is my deceased
medicine-sack and taking the head, she had all in readiness for his
look around where they had thrown the meat, wonderful to behold, they
purpose of hunting, having left the wampum with the woman. They were
and, in endeavoring to overtake them, came to the place where the head
But the feathers were so beautiful, that numbers of them also placed
of each other, dead, and covered with wounds. Various other bodies lay
aid her, and told her the head was hung up before the council-fire, and
and passed their jokes upon it. The chief, looking around, and observing
an ax which she had, she cast it up into the air, crying out, ‘Brothers,
moved into a very large lodge, and their sister told them that the women
The young people and the sister heard the young woman coming high
But the youngest got the most splendid and beautiful, as the bottom of
The spirits then, amid songs and shouts, took their flight to their

scalped, and have ever such a fine time, and write home and tell us all
packing up was necessary, because we were going in the overland stage
dull, and sleepy, and eventless that it has left no more impression on my

--twenty-five pounds each.  So we had to snatch our trunks open, and make a
and it took the whole seven to make a dose for an adult.  But I thought
and presently down would drop the hammer, and away would speed the ball.
along but some pipes and five pounds of smoking tobacco.  We had two
elevations and depressions as far as the eye could reach--like the
of mail matter rose up to the roof.  There was a great pile of it
After supper a woman got in, who lived about fifty miles further on, and


days, and I’ll be along some time to-night, and if I can do ye any good
over the road--so smoothly that our cradle only rocked in a gentle,
horse; and doubtless a vital part, too, from the dismay in the driver’s

had mended the thoroughbrace we filled the two boots again, but put no
the mail sacks, and gazed out through the windows across the wide wastes
climbed up on the seat behind the driver, and let the conductor have our
on, we came to the Big Sandy--one hundred and eighty miles from St.
see, then, for the next minute, is his long gray form stretched out

rough bark, its foliage, its twisted boughs, all complete, he can picture
 --[“Bunch-grass” grows on the bleak mountain-sides of Nevada and
oak.
is worth nothing, for they will eat pine knots, or anthracite coal, or
he smacked his lips once or twice, and reached after the other sleeve.
and died a death of indescribable agony.  I went and pulled the
As the sun went down and the evening chill came on, we made preparation
and pistols where we could find them in the dark.  Then we smoked a final
in a pile at the forward end of the stage, nearly in a sitting posture,
and aided and abetted the book by spilling tobacco in our eyes, and water

nations.  When they spoke to him they received his insolent silence
from--for, let it be borne in mind, the overland driver had but little
them worth speaking of, were thatched and then sodded or covered with a

above the other half.  From the glass frame hung the half of a comb by a
suspenders, no vest, no coat--in a leathern sheath in his belt, a great
barbarians, and the majesty of its native position compelled respect even
company had bought it cheap for the sustenance of their passengers and
(a very, very old one, even at that day) of the traveler who sat down to
Our breakfast was before us, but our teeth were idle.
charm.  It was:
last he grasped the reins and gave the word, the men sprung suddenly away
live to see a railroad follow that route to the Pacific.  But the
     many breakfasts and suppers, our whole party never ceased to admire
     as we washed them down with bumpers of sparkling Krug, whilst we
     out.”
and scamper faster, tied our hats on to keep our hair from blowing away,
misery, a furtive and evil eye, and a long, sharp face, with slightly
of you; he will trot fifty yards and stop again--another fifty and stop
every little while he will smile a fraudful smile over his shoulder that
actually has to slacken speed a little to keep from running away from
reflectively, and then, without a word, he turns and jogs along back to
bacon.
explore the skeleton and polish the bones.  It is considered that the

hundred and fifty miles of road they placed an agent or superintendent,
 His beat was the same length as the agent’s--two hundred and fifty miles.
equivalent for a month of insolence and distress and a bullet and a
would have been above being familiar with such rubbish as passengers,
the mules going at the usual break-neck pace, the conductor said never
smoothly.

      to him, and all Bible names mysteries that had never disturbed his
      and peaks--and for all we know” [dropping his voice impressively],
      Promised Land with anthems of rejoicing!  It was a wonderful,
astonished with.


I could have done it without crippling six or seven other people--but of
sure as truth itself, and he really didn’t know what he was doing.  Then

four sets of nails and my teeth, and the next second after that I was


“Well, all right--go on.  What did you do?”
an awful roar, and must have scared the bull out of his senses.  When the
“No.”
brief sojourn in Siam, years afterward.  The European citizens of a town
that.  Let him shape the conversation to suit himself--let him drop it or
at his ease, and more and more talkative and sociable.  Another hour
He went in the house.  Bascom said:


He rode fifty miles without stopping, by daylight, moonlight, starlight,
letters in it, mostly.  His horse was stripped of all unnecessary weight,
We had had a consuming desire, from the beginning, to see a pony-rider,
and more distinct, more and more sharply defined--nearer and still
This water gave the road a soapy appearance, and in many places the
roots and all, starting little rocks now and then, then big boulders,
personally acquainted with a hundred and thirty-three or four people who
bodily pain.  The Indians robbed the coach of everything it contained,
from St. Joseph.  We had now reached a hostile Indian country, and during
advantage.
Indian country, and lay on our arms.  We slept on them some, but most of
say something, a comrade would be sure to utter a sudden “Hark!” and
“I’m being murdered!  Will no man lend me a pistol?”
thundering away, down a mountain “grade.”

him.”
nothing now about the Indians, and even lost interest in the murdered
but his enemy’s absolute death--nothing less; a man whose face would
of what a Rocky Mountain desperado is, in his highest state of

anything that breathed the breath of life.  He made short work of all
stepped into a store Jules poured the contents of his gun into him from
peace and order to one of the worst divisions of the road, the overland

or stolen, and told Slade, who chanced to visit their camp.  With a
widow after his execution.  Stories of Slade’s hanging men, and of
something which angered Slade--and went and made his will.  A day or two
believed he did it in order to lull the victims into unwatchfulness, so
They disarmed him, and shut him up in a strong log-house, and placed a
of it was something fearful to contemplate.  He examined his enemy to see


He politely offered to fill it, but although I wanted it, I politely

inefficient.  Mr. Dimsdale makes two remarks about Slade, both of which
      they determined that in the absence of the regular civil authority
      committed in this Territory (the latter crime was never laid to his
      become quite common, when Slade was on a spree, for the shop-keepers

      The clicking of the locks of his companions’ revolvers was instantly
      them reckless of consequences.  The day previous he had ridden into
      pause he promised to do so, and actually got into the saddle; but,
      committee had met, and at last resolved to arrest him.  His
      small, as the Virginia men were loath to act at all.  This momentous
      apologized for his conduct, saying that he would take it all back.

      force that has ever appeared in Montana Territory.
      would have certainly incited, forbade the granting of his request.
      Everything being ready, the command was given, “Men, do your duty,”
infamous advantage of his enemy; armed and free, he will stand up before
believing, from the low intellect of such a creature, that it was not
loose cows, were dozens of coarse-clad and sad-looking men, women and
again.
hearing a good deal about for a day or two, and were suffering to see.
us cheerily, and we gave him good day.  He gave us a little Indian news,
mysterious marvel which all Western untraveled boys have heard of and
In a little while quite a number of peaks swung into view with long claws
it seemed that we could look around and abroad and contemplate the whole
purple domes, downy and white with new-laid snow.  In passing, these

wharves of St. Louis and still drift on, traversing shoals and rocky
On the summit we overtook an emigrant train of many wagons, many tired
John never forgave me and we dropped all intercourse and parted, but now
sped away, always through splendid scenery but occasionally through long
did not even see this, for it was too dark.  We fastened down the

At the Green River station we had breakfast--hot biscuits, fresh antelope
four Indians were captured, and the main body chased four miles, but
thing I mean it.
the dark and bloody deeds they had done, and when I entered this one’s
storm and swear at them as he did, let alone one from the place this one
We had a fine supper, of the freshest meats and fowls and vegetables--a
people who are not Mormons.  Our fellow-passenger, Bemis, took care of

stream winding and sparkling among the garden beds and fruit trees--and a
Connecticut, and crouches close down to the ground under a curving wall
or anywhere near them.
length away it had suddenly lost nearly every bit of its interest.  And
He seemed a quiet, kindly, easy-mannered, dignified, self-possessed old
But he was calm.  His conversation with those gentlemen flowed on as
mountains, and waterless, treeless, melancholy deserts to traverse with
notion, and drove home and went about their customary business!  They
me. There was no use in making new contracts--that was plain.  I talked
in the papers or my statement, he would go back and take up the thread
said to them:
monarchy and Brigham Young is king!”
said, “No--the man that marries one of them has done an act of Christian
assassinations of intractable Gentiles.  I cannot easily conceive of
marries another sister--likes her, takes another--likes her, marries her
contains twenty or thirty wives.  They said that some of them had grown
pets that had said the last good thing, but he could not find the child.
the state of things inside the house was not agreeable to the stranger,

together, and if one is a shade finer than the rest, they will all be
vengeance.  I ordered out a flock of Destroying Angels, and they hunted
child of mine and I get my hands on him, I will hang him higher than
it in my nursery, and she left.  And by the ghost of Orson Hyde, when
with! The item of glass alone would support your family, I venture to
large family--mind, I tell you, don’t do it.  In a small family, and in a
CHAPTER XVI.
Testament.  The author labored to give his words and phrases the quaint,

“Hid up” is good.  And so is “wherefore”--though why “wherefore”?  Any
      surety that the work is true.  And we also testify that we have seen
      is one God.  Amen.
      AND ALSO THE TESTIMONY OF EIGHT WITNESSES.
                          PETER WHITMER, JR.,
“books” of Mormon, and three of Nephi.
next day.  Then a bit of genuine nature cropped out, and is revealed by
      for the space of three days; and they began to be frightened

      Lord, I have led this people forth out of the land of Jerusalem, by
contain information not familiar to everybody:
picturesqueness (as seen by these Mormon twelve) accompanied on of the
      were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto
“wilderness of Akish”; and the “land of Moran”; and the “plains of
account of the gathering and the battle:
      breast-plates, and head-plates, and being clothed after the manner
      would take the kingdom, and spare the lives of the people.  But
      shields, all that day; and when the night came there were thirty and
      Coriantumr and Shiz, behold Shiz had fainted with loss of blood.
The Mormon Bible is rather stupid and tiresome to read, but there is
told, for instance, that the dreadful “Mountain Meadows Massacre” was the
existed there--and sometimes even questioning in my own mind whether a
smaller quantity purchasable of any commodity than twenty-five cents’
a month’s acquaintance with the twenty-five cent minimum, the average
stage-drivers, etc., drew near and dropped into the tableau and fell to
aware that these superior beings despised “emigrants.”  We permitted no
willing to do it for him--yea, who are complacently doing it for him
at all.  We had made one alteration, however.  We had provided enough

the beginning of the desert, and twenty-three from the end of it.
write home all about it.
on boughs and bushes.  This is the reality of it.

undisturbed spell and then take it out and find that it had been fooling
not have been found in a whole library of dictionaries language

have been obliged to look the bulky volumes of Wood’s “Uncivilized Races
anything that a hog would eat, though often eating what a hog would
Darwinians trace them to.
would manage to keep hold of them until relieved.
Cooper and a worshipper of the Red Man--even of the scholarly savages in
They deserve pity, poor creatures; and they can have mine--at this

memorable miles of bottomless sand, into which the coach wheels sunk from
Carson, a shallow, melancholy sheet of water some eighty or a hundred


But Hank Monk said, ‘Keep your seat, Horace, and I’ll get you there on
leaving Carson City he told the driver, Hank Monk, that he had an
ever so moving and so beautiful as this outcast’s picture of the first
buttons all off of Horace’s coat, and finally shot his head clean through
comfortable as possible, and constructed a pillow for him with our coats.
this?  That thing which you are about to tell.  Gradually but surely,
listened to that deathless incident four hundred and eighty-one or
and every other correspondence-inditing being that ever set his foot upon
If it were a good anecdote, that seeming demerit would be its chiefest
accustomed to stage life, and very fond of it; so the idea of coming to a
fire.  These teams and their masters were the only life we saw.
five blocks of little white frame stores which were too high to sit down
We were introduced to several citizens, at the stage-office and on the
look quite picturesque.  I never saw Harris shoot a man after that but it
next grade; glass doors, cats and little children on the next; disrupted
their escaping hats, like chambermaids trying to head off a spider.
We found the state palace of the Governor of Nevada Territory to consist
our bed, a small table, two chairs, the government fire-proof safe, and
pasting pictures from Harper’s Weekly on them.  In many cases, too, the
It was a jolly company, the fourteen.  They were principally voluntary
apiece, and they were cheerfully giving their notes for it.  They were
“What, a railroad over the Sierra Nevada Mountains?”
eastward.  They made a good many inquiries as to the location of that
a menagerie arranged along the shelves of the room.  Some of these

something touch his bare skin and had skipped from a bed to the floor.
anxiety to know the amount of damage done by the assaulting roof had not
rather go to war than live that episode over again.  Nobody was hurt.
superb.  In two or three weeks I had grown wonderfully fascinated with
Brigade had been there and located some timber lands on its shores and
level of the sea, and walled in by a rim of snow-clad mountain peaks that
boulder and superintended while Johnny gathered wood and cooked supper.
consciousness, and we were lulled to sleep by the beating of the surf
delicious.  And why shouldn’t it be?--it is the same the angels breathe.
the boat and skirted along the lake shore about three miles and
cut and trimmed the first log it seemed unnecessary to be so elaborate,
rest, we sailed away from the Brigade camp with all the provisions and
was dense and cool, the sky above us was cloudless and brilliant with
While smoking the pipe of peace after breakfast we watched the sentinel
rest and indolence brought.  The shore all along was indented with deep,
boulder descend again, and then we could see that when we had been
nose at a depth of eighty feet, but he would only shake it off with an

devastation.
--flamed out again, directly, higher and still higher up the
conflagration had traveled beyond our range of vision, and then darkness
hundred fathoms of water; so we ran in, with tall white-caps following,

quickly learned to tell a horse from a cow, and was full of anxiety to
keen-eyed person appeared to me to be “taking my measure”; but I
eagerness I could.
animal in a neighboring livery-stable to dine and rest himself.
went up I heard a stranger say:
machinery--for I still needed a hand or two to place elsewhere.  Pen
bloody old foreign relic.”
His lordship the Speaker of the House thought he was, and mounted him to
exercise any other way.
The people only smiled pleasantly, and restrained their desire to buy, if
keeping--stall-room for the horse, fifteen dollars; hay for the horse,


asked kindnesses of them often, and always got them.  It was a mystery to
At this time the population of the Territory was about twelve or fifteen
The new government was received with considerable coolness.  It was not
such-and-such a time, and its sittings inaugurated at such-and-such a

volume of written “instructions,” and these commanded him to do two
the printing of the journals was discontinued.  Then the United States
thousand dollars would not go as far in Nevada, where all commodities
much valuable religious matter in them along with the other statistics)
satisfactory way, but could not sign the voucher owing to lack of ability
voucher for a thousand loads of wood instead of one.
The legislature sat sixty days, and passed private tollroad franchises

States for his family.  The widow Brewster had “struck it rich” in the
I would have been more or less than human if I had not gone mad like the
but turned with the tide and got ready for Humboldt.  That the reader may
      such surface developments made returns of seven thousand dollars to
      trees of the length of two hundred feet.  Then is the fact
one fourth to nearly half the mass was silver!  That is to say, every one
      hinted at in my exordium.  They are toiling and probing.  Their
      expense of reduction, and that then a ton of the raw ore will net
      Occasionally a horseman will dash among us.  His steed betrays
would not yield more than two or three hundred dollars a ton, maybe.  An
Carson on a chilly December afternoon.  The horses were so weak and old
afternoon.  It was plain that we had to walk through the sand and shove
rest.
airs, privileges, or exemptions on that account.  He did a young man’s

the dog out.
Once we made twenty-five miles in a day, and once we made forty miles
The coffee we made of this water was the meanest compound man has yet

Six of the cabins were strung along one side of a deep canyon, and the
I confess, without shame, that I expected to find masses of silver lying
I crawled about the ground, seizing and examining bits of stone, blowing
yellow scales, and my breath almost forsook me!  A gold mine, and in my

“Where have you all been?”
“Yes, a sort of a one.  It’s fair enough here, may be, but overrated.
“Suppose, now--this is merely a supposition, you know--suppose you could
and examined for yourselves.  Anybody would know that, that had been

unornamental stuff, and that only low-born metals excite the admiration
declivities and apparently abandoned; and now and then we found one or
and applying the glass.  At last he exclaimed:
a prominent feature in the mines), and Mr. Ballou wrote out and stuck up
our mine; but that the wall or ledge of rock called the “Monarch of the
--or else we must go down into the valley and bore a long tunnel into the

judged that about nine hundred feet more of it would reach the ledge.
“Golconda,” the “Sultana,” the “Boomerang,” the “Great Republic,” the
Prospecting parties swarmed out of town with the first flush of dawn, and
“specimens” ready; and if the opportunity offered, he would infallibly
And when we get down on it and the ledge comes in solid, it will be the
On such a system of assaying as that, the Humboldt world had gone crazy.
that we had learned the real secret of success in silver mining--which
never have occurred and are never likely to occur in any conversation
packing up and getting away as fast as they could.  In their broken
space on the floors, chairs, etc., was in request, and even then there
horses were lodged.
stable, and wading in, boot-top deep, discovered him asleep in his bed,
occasionally a fight was thrown in for variety.  Dirt and vermin--but let
music.  Through all the profanity, whisky-guzzling, “old sledge” and
opportunity.  Presently Johnson came in, just comfortably sociable with
know wha--what you [‘ic) what you know about Pennsylvania, since you’re
--I wish I may never stir if it wasn’t.”
words I used.  Come, now, Mr. Arkansas, le’s take a drink--le’s shake
“Lan’lord, will you p-please make that remark over agin if you please?”
Arkansas played with his glass a moment, lolling on his elbows on the
“Why bless your soul, Arkansas, I warn’t thinking of such a thing.  My
that it?  Come!”
it’s blood you want, is it, you ravin’ desperado!  You’d made up your
while the wondering crowd closed up and gazed, she gave him such another
possibility of crossing it.  On the eighth it was still too high for an
it was useless; the moment the bow touched the bank, he made a spring and
snow lay so deep on the ground that there was no sign of a road

“Boys, these are our own tracks, and we’ve actually been circussing round
took his pedestrian way Carson-wards, singing his same tiresome song
afternoon, and consequently it was not very long before night came--and
breadth, and rising at the sides in the most natural way, by reason of


bush and piled them on a little cleared place in the shelter of our


at last, took gradual hold upon them--hesitated--took a stronger hold
much and leading you round and round in the snow--but I meant well;
but to make a thorough reform in his character, and by devoting himself
cards in any way was immoral and injurious, and no man could be wholly
now do, with these new incentives and higher and better aims to guide me
I do not know how long I was in a state of forgetfulness, but it seemed
saddled and bridled horses!

ceasing.  Alas, my regeneration was not complete--I wanted to smoke!
cards!
We reached Carson in due time, and took a rest.  This rest, together with
soften, the disastrous land-slides commence.  The reader cannot know what
practical joke.
had come and slid Morgan’s ranch, fences, cabins, cattle, barns and
ends of hay stacks, and awful clouds of dust!--trees going end over end

rest easy and collect the witnesses, for the victory was just as certain
way through the crowd of spectators, with his arms full of law-books, and
with exultation in his face, got up and made an impassioned effort; he
audience waited.  At last he returned to his throne, seated himself, and
to me that Heaven, in its inscrutable wisdom, has seen fit to move this
Hyde, has been deprived of his ranch by the visitation of God!  And from
The General never waited to hear the end of it.  He was always an
journey.  In addition to his conversational powers, he had one or two
the house was full, no provisions on hand, and neither hay nor barley to
supper, an exceedingly sociable time after it, good beds to sleep in, and
had no desire to strike the ledge, knowing that it was as barren of

expiration of ten days.  We were always hunting up new claims and doing a

hundred pounds.  One of us stood by the battery all day long, breaking up

order to understand the full force of his doom to “earn his bread by the
The process of amalgamation differed in the various mills, and this
same facility with which water saturates a sponge--separated its
This mill was but one of many others in operation at the time.  The first
made by compressing bone ashes into a cup-shape in a steel mold.  The
The sagacious reader will know now, without being told, that the
success, he became an object of envy and suspicion.  The other assayers
short a time; that nothing, it seemed to me, gave such scope to
population, about the mysterious and wonderful “cement mine,” and to make
donkeys in the vicinity would be bought, hired or stolen, and half the
on the Plains, wandered on foot through the deserts, avoiding all trails
and leave him to die in the wilderness.  Another, worn out and starving,
nature.  Lumps of virgin gold were as thick in it as raisins in a slice
parties, so as not to attract attention, and meet at dawn on the “divide”
it and then wound a rope all over and about it and under it, “every which
to pull back on his riata occasionally and delay progress.  My comrades
dark in the shadow of the mountain.  So I lay still.  Another head
postage stamp, and thought to myself if he mended his aim ever so little
again.  We remounted the cargo on the pack horse and got under way, and
of the strangest freaks of Nature to be found in any land, but it is

with alkali that if you only dip the most hopelessly soiled garment into
struck out for the shore with considerable interest.  He yelped and
lye.  It is said that the Indians in the vicinity drink it sometimes,
there a belt of flies an inch deep and six feet wide, and this belt
between it and the ocean are one or two ranges of mountains--yet
crusty and disobliging, and didn’t know anything about the time tables,
month in the year, in the little town of Mono.  So uncertain is the

tin canteens with water (since we were not acquainted with the locality
with ashes, and here and there a patch of fine sand.  In places,
solitude, ashes and a heart-breaking silence.  Finally we noticed that
and posted himself on the utmost verge and prepared for the assault.  If
passed within eight or ten yards of him, for he had made up his mind to
upset, of course.  Our only hope lay in keeping her head-on to the seas.
But things cannot last always.  Just as the darkness shut down we came
leisure and solve the problem after his own fashion.
interest to me, from the fact that it came so near “instigating” my
disappeared, leaving not a splinter behind.  Fragments of it fell in the

separate the fragments and tell you which mine each came from, as easily
Higbie brought a handful to the cabin, and when he had washed it out his
“packed” it on mules a hundred and fifty or two hundred miles, over the
got a look into it or not.  He failed that day, and tried again at night;
exclaimed in a stage whisper:
there’s room to hurrah!  But what is the use?  It is a hundred times too
there was a blind lead down in the shaft, and that even the Wide West
--nobody can help them.  I will go into the shaft with you and prove to
No one can be so thoughtless as to suppose that we slept, that night.

“San Francisco.”

“Brown stone front--French plate glass--billiard-room off the
“Going to be gone all summer?”
Greece, Palestine, Arabia, Persia, Egypt--all over--everywhere.”

than to make me hold off for more.
afternoon, as I was coming out of the post office, I met a Mr. Gardiner,
gentleman was himself--which is to say, he was kind-hearted and agreeable
and amending the plans for my house, and thinking over the propriety of
through the country per caravan.  Meantime I was writing to the friends
pain.  Gardiner had his shoulders and I his legs; in an unfortunate

the maniac, and doctored, drenched and bled him, for more than an hour,
minute before, I was rich and brimful of vanity; I was a pauper now, and
broken pane.  Here it was, on the floor, where it had remained
the chances” on my keeping secure a mine worth a million undiscovered
beyond recall, and the crowd rapidly dispersing.  He learned some facts
appearance about that time, with a cocked revolver in his hand, and said
ninety thousand dollars in gold and gone home to the States to enjoy it.
partner, Higbie, wrote me from an obscure little mining camp in
myself, at the age of thirteen (for my father had endorsed for friends;
clerk for awhile, but the customers bothered me so much I could not read
wheel again and never roam any more--but I had been making such an ass of
shovel (the most awkward invention yet contrived by man) to throw it out.
literature.  I had found a letter in the post office as I came home from
humiliation since he was thirteen years old.  Not much to be proud of,
so, but had worn the thing in deference to popular sentiment, and in
It was the whole thing in a nut-shell; and to this day when I find a


had fared rather roughly.  I made the best of the item that the
felt that I was peculiarly endowed with the ability to furnish it.

street I stumbled on Boggs and asked him where he was going.
I must run up to the Union office and see if I can get them to let me
only an inferior sort of bar-room murder, and of little interest to the
Of course there was no school report in the Union, and Boggs held me
rope, implored Boggs not to go to sleep or let the windlass get the start
“Could you wait a little?”
Six months after my entry into journalism the grand “flush times” of
as plenty as dust; every individual considered himself wealthy, and a
The great “Comstock lode” stretched its opulent length straight through
“Comstock,” hundreds of feet down in the earth directly under those same
scratch of a pin was a disaster worth worrying about, for the chances
glimpsed, with the silver thread of a river winding through it, bordered

day, and every man believed that his little wild cat claim was as good as
and sell out for hundreds and even thousands of dollars.  To make money,
it.  They did not care a fig what you said about the property so you said
--but never utter a whisper about the rock.  And those people were always
The prices rose and fell constantly; but still a fall disturbed us
man offered a stock present to a friend, for the offer was only good and
he would do the same.  But I was going after an inquest and could not
cellars, where the pick had exposed what seemed to be quartz veins--and
another street; and to show how absurd people can be, that “East India”
 It was claimed that this vein was a “remote extension” of the original
any hackneyed way, either, but in a singularly bold, barefaced and
The “flush times” held bravely on.  Something over two years before, Mr.
“Enterprise Building” was finished and ready for occupation--a stately
have had one per cent. on the gross yield of the bullion likewise.
contributions.  His voice was drowned and his information lost in a
To use its own phraseology, it came there “flush” and went away “busted.”
and carried it a mile or two, from Lower Austin to his home in Upper

secured, and there was a crestfallen feeling in the community.  However,
cavalcade moved on as if Virginia had ceased to be of importance, and
A tempest of applause followed.  A telegram carried the news to Virginia,
filed down C street at half past eight in the evening the town was abroad
in San Francisco.  Then he took it east and sold it in one or two
returning, were paid in large part if not entirely, out of his own


the hay business, for his mining income had reached a most comfortable
serene and happy, for he had been bribing the engineer.  But another
belonged originally to the two men whose names it bears.  Mr. Curry owned
entire mine; four years after the swap, its market value (including its
names in the list of San Francisco steamer arrivals, used to ingeniously
within an hour after its private reception by the parties to it in San


In Nevada there used to be current the story of an adventure of two of
They stepped out on the sidewalk, and Col. Jim called a stylish barouche.
Then he put his head out of the window, and shouted to the driver:

Jack.
the least uneasy.  Make yourself just as free as if you was in your own
episode.  Half a dozen more passengers entered.
that ever I saw, I’m an Injun!” whispered Col. Jack.
comfortable as anybody.  If we’d staid awhile, I reckon we’d had some
philosopher I have quoted from would have needed to see two
cut his throat, and jumped out of a four-story window and broken his
Nevada.  It was hard to preach a sermon without it, and be understood.
weighty official business, like committee work, was a fire helmet,
that, but had stolen their coats and made off with them!  But to return
With another sigh and a half-sob, Scotty rejoined:
“You ruther hold over me, pard.  I reckon I can’t call that hand.  Ante
of fact unencumbered with obstructing accumulations of metaphor and

“Now you talk!  You see my blind and straddle it like a man.  Put it
“Yes--kicked the bucket--”
But you bet you he’s awful dead now, poor old boy, and I wish I’d never
He was the worst son of a thief that ever drawed breath.  Pard, he was on
going to get the thing up regardless, you know.  He was always nifty
prance in and regulate it himself.  He warn’t a Catholic.  Scasely.  He
more, and say it slow?”

he was a great loss to this town.  It would please the boys if you could
“Well, but why should he shake her?”
all the time; and when she was down with the small-pox I’m d---d if he
carriages of officials, and citizens in vehicles and on foot, attracted

that grave, earnest teacher, and was listened to by his little learners

whisky.  I am not sure but that the saloon-keeper held a shade higher
tried to “kill their men” for no other reason--and got killed themselves
candle-clock after we had invented chronometers?  In his day news could
“Have you heard of this homicide?”

about nor expressed an opinion concerning a murder which the very cattle
and probity, swears that testimony given under solemn oath will outweigh,
desperadoism in the “flush times” of Nevada.  To attempt a portrayal of

Sam Brown, Jack Williams, Billy Mulligan, Farmer Pease, Sugarfoot Mike,
instance--any name will do.  Presently a stranger with a long-tailed coat

might come and carve me.  He finally inquired if Brown still thirsted for
An extract or two from the newspapers of the day will furnish a
      saloon; saw Billy Brown running around, saying if anybody had
      billiard-table and told a party that I had Brown’s pistol, and to
      our German friend was carried away with rapture.  He evidently had
citizens at dead of night in the public streets of Virginia.
the killing of Reeder are worth nothing--especially the accommodating
      giving him “no show.”  Gumbert said that Williams had “as good a
      Reeder did not feel his wounds as he otherwise would, and he got up
      to heed the warning, when he fired.  Reeder was at the time
      arrested and his gun taken from him, when he was marched off to
      shot fired.  After being shot, Reeder said when he got on his feet
Nevada--perhaps I would be within bounds if I said three hundred--and as
efforts to get out of the country unwatched.  He went to Carson and sat

Capt. Ned Blakely--that name will answer as well as any other fictitious
who would fight at the dropping of a handkerchief, when imposed upon, and
‘tother--I’ll know which, before I go ashore.”
to pick a quarrel with him.  The negro evaded the trap, and tried to get
fished out a pair of handcuffs, got a ship’s lantern, summoned his
“Very well, then.  Take the lantern.  Carry it just under your chin.
Quartermaster, fasten ‘em.  All right.  Don’t stir, sir.  Quartermaster,

for it.  I don’t understand such bloody foolishness as that.  Tried!
There was a stir in the camp.  The captains came in a body and pleaded

guard to bring him.
else there’ll be a double-barreled inquest here when this trial’s off,
Capt.  Ned’s patience was at an end.  His wrath was boundless.  The
The captain read another chapter, pausing, from time to time, to impress
timed him half an hour with his watch, and then delivered the body to the

was to edit it.  He was a felicitous skirmisher with a pen, and a man who
We expected great things of the Occidental.  Of course it could not get
in such a way as to provide plenty of trouble for their future careers
His chapter was to follow Mr. D.’s, and mine was to come next.  Now what
widow succumb to contumely, neglect, poverty and consumption; caused the
bewildered, looking from one to another of his assailants, and wondering
But on the way thither the evil angel tempted him and he got drunk again.
the quick, she tore her affections from him and bestowed them with
the lawyer’s protracted absence would do the rest--for they did not
had saved himself.  In the morning two whale ships arrived on the scene
North Atlantic and could not go back such a distance or make a port
wedding at sea among icebergs and walruses.  Five days more and all would
There were foot-notes to this extravagant piece of literature wherein the
journal, and the absence of the novel probably shook public confidence;
I was sorry enough, for I was very proud of being connected with a
On the Erie Canal, it was,



Can nothing help them more?”
We’re all”--then with a shout,
As on the vessel flew,
Would have swum in the saving lock!
Said Dollinger the pilot man,
Or one’t with it began!”
Luff!--bring her to the wind!”
CHAPTER LII.
get in, somehow, and impair the accuracy of those scales.
usually about twice the size of a pig of lead and contained from $1,500
that office, during the next quarter, $570,000; next quarter, $800,000;
this year will be about $30,000,000.  Placing the number of mills in the
lucrative.
eye could pierce to its top through the closing gloom.  It was like

of shooting like a dart down a shaft, on a small platform.  It is like
of wagons loading from chutes and trap-doors in the bins, and down the
      yesterday, to see the earthquake.  We could not go down the deep
      entered a tunnel leading into the Central, for the purpose of
      it, supporting another horizontal beam, and so on, square above
      Returning along the fifth gallery, we struck the safe part of the
      produced $25,000,000 in bullion--almost, if not quite, a round
      will carry the ore through the tunnel and dump it in the mills and

powder-keg, with a clay pipe in one hand and the other raised to command
bullier old ram than what he was.  Grandfather fetched him from Illinois
--I disremember his first name; but he was a stump--come into pra’r meeting
empty, and making them oncomfortable, becuz she never could tell when it
company and things had to be done, she wanted to get up and hump herself.
powerful weak; he bought the coffin for ten dollars and Jacops was to pay
was the widder Billings--she that was Becky Martin; her dam was deacon
an accident.
parson Hagar before Uncle Lem got him.  Parson Hagar belonged to the


of work, but a Chinaman offers no such complaint; he always manages to
particularly object to, as they are fond of herding together.  Their
to see his master break up a centre table, in a passion, and kindle a
legislature has given the broad, general name of “foreign” mining tax,
departed are held in such worshipful reverence, a Chinaman cannot bear
case of death.  On the Pacific coast the Chinamen all belong to one or
another bill--it became a law--compelling every incoming Chinaman to be
      carriages nor wagons, their streets are not wide enough, as a
      to smoke--and the stewing and frying of the drug and the gurgling of
to try, but we suspected that each link contained the corpse of a mouse,
Enterprise, when the establishment kept bachelor’s hall two years ago,
unscratchable with steel instruments, yet polished and tinted like the
They are a kindly disposed, well-meaning race, and are respected and well

since it had nothing to tax that could stand a tax, for undeveloped mines
The son of wealthy parents, here he was, in a strange land, hungry,
would the banker.
personalities had borne fruit.
work would make, after twenty or thirty years’ service.  Yet people often
and wondering to myself how in the mischief he did it!
I asked Dan if it was a good, honest mine, and no swindle.  He said the
had yet gone East to sell a Nevada silver mine, and the field was white
bricks was thrown in.  He was standing on the pavement, when an awkward
crushed foot.
other matters, enters a saloon (twenty-five cents is the price for

round promiscuous, where [‘ic!) where people’s liable to stumble over him
and even then not enough at a time to make it worth while for any
was the flag!--though no one suspected it at first, it seemed so like a
artillery!
custom of the country on all occasions of public moment.  Even at this
a Californian forest is best at a little distance, for there is a sad
because although its grass blades are tall, they stand up vindictively
and her maples, oaks and cathedral-windowed elms decked in summer attire,
San Francisco, a truly fascinating city to live in, is stately and
Winter, and never use a mosquito bar.  Nobody ever wears Summer clothing.
you will require it.  Not just one day, but one hundred and twenty days
rain--hail--snow--thunder and lightning--anything to break the monotony
--though I thought it grew only in Central America--down on the Isthmus.
wear out their stanchest energies fanning themselves.  It gets hot there,
eight or nine o’clock in the morning, and then take the cars, and at noon
and savage crags and precipices.
it hard to believe that there stood at one time a fiercely-flourishing
California.
prematurely aged and decrepit--or shot or stabbed in street affrays--or
But they were rough in those times!  They fairly reveled in gold, whisky,

“Fetch her out!  We’ve got to see her!”
with his daughter, a young lady whose first experience in San Francisco


the best hotel, exhibited my clothes in the most conspicuous places,
against the State Constitution; but the folks who had nothing to lose
paper they were printed on.  I threw them all away.  I, the cheerful
mining speculation!  I was hardly ever so sick in my life.  I abused
till this day.  It was just after noon, on a bright October day.  I was
Third street sprung outward like a door and fell sprawling across the
Never was solemn solitude turned into teeming life quicker.
supposed to keep the Sabbath strictly, rushed out of saloons in their
“If you have no choice, you might try a clothing-store!”
eyeing and pointing men stood about many a building, looking at long
some little time afterward, was club-footed.  However--on second
And added, after the third:

      which is said to be the largest amount of stamps ever placed on one

foolish regrets, that I neglected my duties and became about worthless,
employed to contribute an article a week at $12.  But the journal still
mouthful I robbed my generous landlady of, and at midnight, after
He would get out his bill, calculate the interest for me, at five per
and would get as uneasy as any mother if the day went by without his
enjoying our dumb companionship.
This mendicant Blucher--I call him that for convenience--was a splendid
could trade his life away for a morsel to eat.  The sight of the bread
sauntered about with his hands in his pockets, looking up at the signs
his mind was not made up.  He turned out and went up Merchant street,
with rags; with a haggard face and sunken cheeks, and eyes that pleaded
poor friendless, homeless dog!  As God is my judge, I have not tasted
him at a marble table, placed the bill of fare before him, and said:
the myriad curiosities of Californian life, perhaps.
decay, and in a few years wholly disappeared--streets, dwellings, shops,
two or three months, was a man who had had a university education; but
you reap a rich and sudden harvest.  There are not now more than twenty
Pocket hunting is an ingenious process.  You take a spadeful of earth
wandered.  And so you proceed up the hill, washing the earth and

amuse themselves by chipping off flakes from the boulder with a
to novelty.
Whenever he was out of luck and a little down-hearted, he would fall to
life--‘peared to be above it.  He never cared for nothing but mining.
didn’t want no better prospect ‘n’ that--‘n’ then he would lay down on
never could abide’em.  You know how it is with old habits.  But by an’ by
rocks ‘n’ dirt ‘n’ smoke ‘n; splinters shot up ‘bout a mile an’ a half
--an’ it was just exactly the same as if he had said--‘Gents, may be you
remarkable, considering how he came by it.  Couldn’t you ever cure him of
out in the pan and we dug down, hoping and longing, we found only
reader a vivid description of the Big Trees and the marvels of the Yo
determines whether it is a good or a bad prospect, and whether it is
I wanted another change.  The vagabond instinct was strong upon me.
and earnest, whole-souled profanity.  But nevertheless he was
should be devised for him and used solely to welcome his coming and wave

to be present at the trial of any universally execrated criminal to
during our voyage was any fraction short of rigid or inflexible
wind.”--And now, his state-room door swung open and the sun of his
through a weather beaten mask of mahogany, and studded with warts, seamed
required information.  If it was not there, he supplied it himself, out
would drop out with quiet accord, afraid to meet him; and he would camp
inviting annihilation was a thing incomprehensible.  The retreat came to
and ashes of indignation, belching black volumes of foul history aloft,
he is I will come out and thank him for clearing this matter up for me.
that on the 16th of October, 1860, two Massachusetts clergymen, named
in it, content to nibble about the surface, but a man who has searched
afterward burned them at the stake in the city of Charleston.  You
shown the least disposition to withhold a just verdict or be in anywise
and went away, a vanquished man.  Then cheers and laughter went up, and
dread Williams and his gilded tongue that he would stop talking when he
beach; then the plumed coacoanut trees of the tropics; then cabins of the
foliage the sun could scarcely penetrate; in place of the customary
cats, armies of cats, multitudes of cats, millions of cats, and all of
I saw long-haired, saddle-colored Sandwich Island maidens sitting on the
Golden City’s skirting sand hills and the placid bay, I saw on the one
A scorpion bite.  Then the first duty was to get up out of the grass and
tropics in occasional wakeful intervals.
them once.
to-day--time, 4:30 P.M.--the party to consist of half a dozen gentlemen
the journey we rode through an impenetrable fog, and ran by a pocket
them.  I said, never mind--I preferred a safe horse to a fast one--I
the meantime the tropical sun was beating down and threatening to cave
tried to climb over a stone wall, five or six feet high.  I saw that I
both feet were through, and I was handcuffed by the legs; and sometimes
lightning.  I think that describes it better than a picture--and yet,
“The King’s Grove.”
ignorance he had gone and fooled away all his kinfolks to no purpose;
mute stones could speak, what tales they could tell, what pictures they
The King and the chiefs ruled the common herd with a rod of iron; made

where no grass grew--a wide expanse of deep sand.  They said it was an
they came here, they can only conjecture.  Many people believe this spot
oath, and the march was resumed.  Kamehameha drove them back step by
Oahuans were intrenched in Nuuanu Valley; that Kamehameha ousted them,
flocking in ghostly squadrons to their ancient battlefield again--how the
regular livery stable in Honolulu, or, indeed, in any part of the Kingdom
because you can rest satisfied that you are dealing with a shrewd
“But I know I hired the horse of you, because I noticed that scar on your
went lame a mile from town, and afterward got to cutting up some
in a little stable with a partition through the middle of it--one horse
estimate “Oahu” to be worth somewhere in the neighborhood of thirty-five
pole, and the Kanaka shoulders the pole and walks about the streets
a rich voice rises out of the still night, and, far as this ocean rock is
its most favorable auspices--that is, in the full glory of Saturday
The girls put on all the finery they can on Saturday afternoon--fine
sides of the face, and a strip of the original yellow skin, two inches

swallowed--the eye closing gently, meanwhile, in a languid sort of
white scales, inflames the eyes, and causes premature decripitude.
without getting crippled.
Of late years, however, Saturday has lost most of its quondam gala
They have any quantity of books, printed in the Kanaka language, and all
out boldly and address him as “Captain.”  Watch him narrowly, and if you
“No, I don’t.  I’m not a preacher.”


Ministers (about a dozen of them altogether) occupied the extreme left of
them.  He bears himself with a calm, stately dignity, and is a man of
gentleman; a traveler, in some degree, and one who has been the honored
because he imagines that some enemy is putting him through a course of
dinner.  She was not only forbidden, by ancient law, and under penalty of
to, whether there is anything the matter with them or not.  If a Kanaka
for help when disaster threatens.  A planter caught a shark, and one of

apparel, instituted a general distribution, and begged the people not to
gotten up in a fiery neck-tie and a striped vest.

Then there is his Excellency the “royal Chamberlain”--a sinecure, for his
from New Hampshire, all jaw, vanity, bombast and ignorance, a lawyer of
a foreign power we shall probably hear from them.  I knew an American
imported a cheap ready-made Bishop from England to take charge.  The

there--weak-eyed people have to contemplate the spectacle through smoked
multitude of natives from the several islands had kept the palace grounds
Undertaker.
His Lordship Louis Maigret, The Right Rev. Bishop of Arathea,
Members of Legislative Assembly.
royal mausoleum:
previously silenced to permit of the guns being heard.  His Highness
of their persons to his Majesty, and never putting their hats on until
Yankee Prime Minister).  This feeble personage had crape enough around
      with the most eminent of his countrymen he may be justly styled not
      made fish-hooks and arrows of them, upon which, in using them, they
      life, that human victims should be sacrificed to his deity; upon
      strength to turn himself in his bed.  When another season,
      mouth which he did not swallow; also a cup of water.  The chiefs
      once more to the house for eating, into which his head entered,
      to the King, by whom he had formerly been kindly sustained.  The
      new King.  The name of this ceremony is uko; and when the sacred hog
      shall be the residence of King Liholiho?’  They replied, ‘Where,

      put into action the sorcery apparatus, that the person who had

They were not the salt of the earth, those “gentle children of the sun.”

the deck which is sacred to the cabin passengers, it was full--there was
but little freight in it, and from morning till night a portly old

a procession of cockroaches arrived and camped in my hair.  In a few
angry foam hissing past her lee bulwarks, and sparkling sheets of spray

miles as the bird flies!
gently down from the mountain to the sea.  It was pleasant also, at



too, for a thing to travel so far in--now isn’t it?  Yes, yes--the
correspondence, you cannot know the straight of it till you hear it from
deep concern.  I was living in Michigan, then--serving in the ministry.
without exaltation.  He could not eat it without shedding tears.  All the
watchful eye noted these things and in time a motherly sympathy unsealed
appeared to be simply casual mentions, nothing more; friendly in spirit,
                               HEVACE EVEELOJ.’
      wither in the east.  Creation perdu, is done; for woes inherent one
“I was still not satisfied.  These generalities did not meet the
      be void.  But dirt, bathing, etc., etc., followed unfairly, will
      bodily strength.--But if they do restrain it, will you bear with us
      endeavor to get along with them, at any rate, and not go mousing
plain hand by his clerk.  Then the mystery cleared, and I saw that his
with a turnip in each hand.”
structure higher and higher.  Underneath, it is honey-combed with caves;
that time, but they did not leave casts of their figures in the lava as
the Rainbow Islands?  These charming spectacles are present to you at
bounds the inner extremity of it.  From this wall the place takes its
toward the shore--the--but I discovered that I could not do it.
the limitless power it gave him; but during the famous disturbance at
They treated him well.  In return, he abused them.  He and his men
      CAPTAIN JAMES COOK,
A thing like a guide-board was elevated above this pen on a tall pole,
CHAPTER LXXII.
myself, on general principles, although at a time when I did not know
Quite a broad tract of land near the temple, extending from the sea to
noiseless multitude of phantoms were seen at their strange labor far up
filled the air with their laughter.  It is said that the first thing an
our own fashion of rewarding heroes, with the difference that we would

assistant in the Government, Kaahumanu, the Queen dowager, was proud and
Then conviction came like a revelation--the superstitions of a hundred
were powerless to protect themselves they went to work at once and pulled
under Major General Kalaimoku and the two host met a Kuamoo.  The battle
as in a virgin soil.
so narrow that if you wedged a fat man into it you might not get him out
reef, it was pastime to look down into the limpid depths at the large
arching over a wave and disappearing, and then doing it over again and
board placed right, and at the right moment, too; but missed the
In those days, if a man killed another anywhere on the island the
feet upon the sacred ground and barred him against all harm.  Where did
criminals were killed, the flesh stripped from the bones and burned, and
are very creditable specimens of masonry.  The blocks are of all manner
“soldiering” done.  And no doubt there was not any done to speak of,
would take a score of horses to budge it from its position.  They say
degree of engineering skill.  Some say that that wise old pagan,
and rippled a petrified Niagara.  It is very picturesque, and withal so
waves of the sea.  It is a commodious tunnel, except that there are
bought horses and bent our way over the summer-clad mountain-terraces,
thousand feet in diameter, if as much as that; its fires meagre, modest,
dark and then started to the crater.  The first glance in that direction
children of Israel wandered on their long march through the desert so
on a furlough.

sharp worm-fence angles, which looked precisely like the fiercest jagged
crimson cauldron.  Then the wide expanse of the “thaw” maintained a ruddy
sprays of stringy red fire--of about the consistency of mush, for
I could see the North Lake lying out on the black floor away off in the
wheels.  The smell of sulphur is strong, but not unpleasant to a sinner.
thousand-foot pathway in a crevice fractured in the crater wall, and
to serve as a beacon for us in case we got lost, and then the party
with beds of rotten lava through which we could easily break and plunge
kept up a sharp listening for the rasping sound and it always warned us
gem spangles, some white, some red and some golden--a ceaseless
lashing against the shores and shaking the foundations of our perch.  By
sent a broad river of fire careering down to the sea, which swept away

making the distance two hundred miles), and enjoyed the journey very
that I had always owned the horse and was accustomed to grandeur; how
blister me all over: she said that my horse was a fine, capable animal,
railway, is an example.  It would recede into pitiable insignificance if
convinced at last that the water was friendly and harmless, they thrust
chalk--for I never saw a white stone that a body could mark anything
fronts, mottling them with blots; billowy masses of white vapor hid the

ten thousand feet deep, with the valley and the skirting sea lifted away
they sped farther into distance; growing invisible, finally, and only

at hand, some in the middle distances, and others relieving the monotony
of it will remain with me always.
discussion--and I made it with due modesty, for there was nothing

gentleman--but I am obliged to say that you could not, and you would not
“Hear the man talk!  Of course the tree was reduced that way, but didn’t

eighteen miles!  It did, by the everlasting hills!  And I’m telling you
“Oh, my dear sir, really you expose yourself when you parade that as a
blast of powder, and was standing over it ramming it down with an iron
poor cuss warn’t gone only sixteen minutes, and yet that Incorporated
breast was pinned a paper in his own handwriting begging his friends to
said he was dead, and he was dead; and would he have told the truth if he
of better sport.  Twenty-four hours afterward these bottles would be
enterprise with absorbing interest.  We were at sea five Sundays; and
proposition was charming; it seemed fraught with practical worldly
reminding school pupils in vacation what time next term would begin.  As
said that if she was willing to do me a very great kindness, I would be
you get it off easy?”
known it.”  I thought of suicide, pretended illness, flight.  I thought
well knew what I was about, I was in the middle of the stage, staring at

let it go at that.
Two days before I lectured in Virginia City, two stagecoaches were robbed
out on this eminence, the Gold Hill lights dropped out of sight at our


I put them above my head again.
“Cheese it!  Will you give up your money, or have we got to--.  There
those pistols so close--I smell the powder.
it again.  Help Beauregard, Stonewall.”

couple of idiots, with our hands aloft, freezing to death by inches,
minutes or die.  Don’t you move.”
really frighten me bad enough to make their enjoyment worth the trouble
When I returned to San Francisco I projected a pleasure journey to Japan
Thus, after seven years of vicissitudes, ended a “pleasure trip” to the

“church” in Ohio and Brigham Young joined it.  The neighbors began to
neighborhood, on both sides of the Mississippi, claimed that polygamy was
years”--probably the longest term ever inflicted in Illinois.  The people
party crossed the country and founded Great Salt Lake City, purposely
gold, which gleaned the flower of the youth and strength of many nations
the day of his death.
their wives and children.  If a disciple dies before he has had time to
with their lamentations and marking the long way with graves of their
in office they were as helpless as so many stone images.  They made laws
officer kept on courageously till his pluck was proven, some pliant
laughed at our armies when they camped about his capital--a monarch who
in its day.  The whole United States rang with its horrors.  A few items
hand?”
mandate of Almighty God.”
saw white men coming they threw down their guns and welcomed them with
which was, that the emigrants should march out of their camp, leaving
eldest of them being only seven years old.  Thus, on the 10th day of
the occasion:
murders and robberies committed upon the Gentiles during the past eight
summary is concise, accurate and reliable:
“3.  The flight to the mountains of men high in authority in the Mormon
“7.  The statements of Indians in the neighborhood of the scene of the

expected to be: colossal to ear, but pigmy to the eye.  It is extravagant

which I am superintendent), in consequence of my publications, has been
first laboring had been clearly and repeatedly pointed out.  This same
How long before the whole of your prophecy will be fulfilled I cannot
Despite the insult and wrong heaped upon me by John B. Winters, on
whole affair, but shall forbear all comments, presuming that the editors
a favor, hoping that some conference with Sharon looking to the
in a saloon, that Mr. Winters had told him he had decided either to kill

while waiting for some other parties, and to come in if he heard my voice
feel I must fight a duel, or to join and aid in the ranks of a necessary
from it, with both or even one door closed, when too late, I saw that I
this carpeted den I was invited to a seat near one corner of the room.
“Nor did I come here to insult you.  I have already told you that I am
ruin through possible libel suits.”
I confess this speech, with its terrible and but too plainly implied
nothing to retract, and no one could rightly urge you to demand a
notified the world that no information as to the authorship of any
and the succeeding paragraph shows that the suggested investigation
write the article if I did not myself, and this time shaking his fist in
own house.  I realized then the situation thoroughly.  I had found it
should I do--I, a man of family, and not as Mr. Winters is, “alone.”
“Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.”  Therefore,
and which at times I have found to work even in the dark over the lower
wrote in pencil, altering it from time to time till I got it to suit me,
in the premises, I hereby declare that I do not know those “charges” (if
“Nor do I,” said Winters; “in fact, I regard it as adding insult to
something, Philip Lynch’s hand must write at your dictation, and if, when

“Come, now, we’ve talked about the matter long enough.  I want your final
“And do you then retract it or not?”
“Take that, then,” and to my amazement and inexpressible relief he drew
non-aggressive defence, and made no other use of my arms than to defend

have been, or at least to his meaning to make an assault upon me, but I
badly must have been desired for some other purpose.
fact.  The scheme of the assault may have been:
Fourth--Philip Lynch to be compelled to testify that I was killed by John
verbally spoken and suffered a thoroughly garbled statement of facts to
fitting man to supervise and control Yellow Jacket matters, until I am
