OLIVER TWIST
TREATS OF THE PLACE WHERE OLIVER TWIST WAS BORN AND OF THE
case it is somewhat more than probable that these memoirs would never
the next: the balance being decidedly in favour of the latter.  Now,
As Oliver gave this first proof of the free and proper action of his
she had been tasting in a corner with evident satisfaction.
breast, hands, and temples; but the blood had stopped forever.  They
She was brought here last night, replied the old woman, by the
covering, he might have been the child of a nobleman or a beggar; it
CHAPTER II
some three miles off, where twenty or thirty other juvenile offenders

usually summoned into another world, and there gathered to the fathers
made periodical pilgrimages to the farm, and always sent the beadle the
hungry, when Mrs. Mann, the good lady of the house, was unexpectedly
Lor, only think, said Mrs. Mann, running out,--for the three boys had
Im sure Mr. Bumble, that I was only a telling one or two of the dear
perspiration which his walk had engendered, glanced complacently at the

Ah, bless em, that I do, dear as it is, replied the nurse. I
corner of her apron.
I, Mrs. Mann.  We name our fondlings in alphabetical order. The last
purpose.  Oliver, having had by this time as much of the outer coat of
furious countenance.  He took the hint at once, for the fist had been
piece of bread and butter, less he should seem too hungry when he got
by this time evaporated; and he was once again a beadle.
a table.  At the top of the table, seated in an arm-chair rather higher
at his ease.

Well!  You have come here to be educated, and taught a useful trade,
over all his future fortunes.  But they had.  And this was it:
corn-factor to supply periodically small quantities of oatmeal; and
For the first six months after Oliver Twist was removed, the system was
The bowls never wanted washing.  The boys polished them with their
tender age.  He had a wild, hungry eye; and they implicitly believed
Please, sir, I want some more.
the room in great excitement, and addressing the gentleman in the high
know that boy will be hung.
As I purpose to show in the sequel whether the white waistcoated
solitary room to which he had been consigned by the wisdom and mercy of
corner, tried to sleep: ever and anon waking with a start and tremble,
advantages of religious consolation, he was kicked into the same
could not raise them within full five pounds of the desired amount;
donkeys.  Then, catching hold of the bridle, he gave his jaw a sharp
was, well knew he would be a nice small pattern, just the very thing
Walk in, said the gentleman in the white waistcoat.  Mr. Gamfield
for it only sinds him to sleep, and thats wot he likes.  Boys is wery
At length the whispering ceased; and the members of the board, having
rumour, he twisted his cap in his hands, and walked slowly from the
I should say, three pound ten was plenty, said Mr. Limbkins.

into a clean shirt.  He had hardly achieved this very unusual gymnastic
is so many parents to you, Oliver, when you have none of your own: are

Now, Oliver, my dear, come to the gentleman.  As Mr. Bumble said


simultaneous, your worship, replied Bumble.
I hope I am, sir, said Mr. Gamfield, with an ugly leer.
future master, with a mingled expression of horror and fear, too
they would order him back to the dark room--that they would starve

matter, said the second old gentleman sharply.  Take the boy back to

death, in a playful mood, some day after dinner, or would knock his
of threadbare black, with darned cotton stockings of the same colour,
cane.
handles come, by canal, from Birmingham.
who have been better off, and have paid rates for many years, are the
Mr. Sowerberry, liberal terms?  As Mr. Bumble spoke, he raised his
to attend the inquest on that reduced tradesman, who died in a doorway
Very true, said the undertaker; they would indeed.
So do I, rejoined the undertaker.
Well; what about the boy?
if the master find, upon a short trial, that he can get enough work out
were rather out, in this particular instance.  The simple fact was,
great advantage his flapped waistcoat and drab plush knee-breeches.  As
him, it rolled down his cheek. It was followed by another, and another.
So what? inquired Mr. Bumble in amazement.
dismal candle, when Mr. Bumble entered.

a steep flight of stairs into a stone cell, damp and dark: forming the
within him; whose blood is ice, whose heart is iron; could have seen
lamp, and leading the way upstairs; your beds under the counter.  You
down on a workmans bench, and gazed timidly about him with a feeling
hot.  The atmosphere seemed tainted with the smell of coffins.  The
bell to soothe him in his sleep.

trembling hand, and opened the door.
Did you want a coffin, sir? inquired Oliver, innocently.
dignified air, which did him great credit.  It is difficult for a
Come near the fire, Noah, said Charlotte.  I saved a nice little bit
well.  Eh, Charlotte?  He! he! he!
leathers, charity, and the like; and Noah had bourne them without

But, my dear, said Sowerberry, I want to ask your advice.

was much struck by the novelty of this idea; but, as it would have been
Aha! said the undertaker, glancing over it with a lively countenance;

whats the ungrateful behaviour of these rebels, sir?  Why, the husband
but now shes dead, weve got to bury her; and thats the direction;
however; for that functionary, on whom the prediction of the gentleman
to look for the house which was the object of their search.  The houses
very rats, which here and there lay putrefying in its rottenness, were
over the empty stove.  An old woman, too, had drawn a low stool to the
undertaker approached the recess. Keep back! Damn you, keep back, if
the feet of the dead woman; kneel down, kneel down--kneel round her,
passed, menaced them into silence.  Having unloosened the cravat of the
Stop, stop! said the old woman in a loud whisper.  Will she be
Mr. Bumble had already arrived, accompanied by four men from the

At length, after a lapse of something more than an hour, Mr. Bumble,



of demeanour and full command of nerve which was essential to a
render it as becoming and attractive as possible.  It was observable,
did; and Mrs. Sowerberry was his decided enemy, because Mr. Sowerberry
being hungry and vicious, considered he could not possibly devote to a
Shes dead, replied Oliver; dont you say anything about her to me!

was a regular right-down bad un.
creature that harsh treatment had made him.  But his spirit was roused
life, to come further down.
This was rather too violent exercise to last long.  When they were all
master not to have any more of these dreadful creatures, that are born
question, rendered this occurance highly probable.
charity-boy tearing through the streets pell-mell, with no cap on his
times, started back in astonishment.
What?  What? interposed Mr. Bumble: with a gleam of pleasure in his
dreadful wounds ten times louder than before; and when he observed a
By Jove! exclaimed the gentleman in the white waistcoat, stopping
white waistcoat.
undertakers shop.



apprenticeship.  He comes of a bad family. Excitable natures, Mrs.
The angry flush had not disappeared, however; and when he was pulled

resource; so he at once gave him a drubbing, which satisfied even Mrs.
had roasted him alive.  But now, when there were none to see or hear
candle to tie up in a handkerchief the few articles of wearing apparel
Along this same footpath, Oliver well-remembered he had trotted beside

see you again, Dick.  I know I shall!  You will be well and happy!
CHAPTER VIII

two pairs of stockings, in his bundle.  He had a penny too--a gift of
turned into a meadow; and, creeping close under a hay-rick, determined
then begged of the outside passengers; but there were very few who took
a proceeding which generally terminated in the landladys ordering one
she could afford--and more--with such kind and gentle words, and such
how he came there. He had no heart to beg. And there he sat.
Hullo, my covey!  Whats the row?
trousers; for there he kept them.  He was, altogether, as roystering
Oliver mildly replied, that he had always heard a birds mouth
far as it goes, Ill fork out and stump.  Up with you on your pins.

the big coat-sleeves would let them go.
Certainly not!
comforts which his patrons interest obtained for those whom he took
Street and Coppice Row; down the little court by the side of the
sole places that seemed to prosper amid the general blight of the
Dodger.

candle, stuck in a ginger-beer bottle, two or three pewter pots, a loaf

We are very glad to see you, Oliver, very, said the Jew. Dodger,


almost everybody he had ever known.
Aha! said the Jew, shrugging up his shoulders, and distorting every
inscription on it; for the Jew laid it flat upon the table, and shading

No! No, indeed! replied Oliver.
Did you see any of these pretty things, my dear? said the Jew, laying
Certainly, my dear, certainly, replied the old gentleman. Stay.
Well, said the Jew, glancing slyly at Oliver, and addressing himself

very. You havent marked them well, though, Charley; so the marks shall

this way. The merry old gentleman, placing a snuff-box in one pocket of
upon his toes, or ran upon his boot accidently, while Charley Bates
very nice girls indeed.  As there is no doubt they were.


Oliver wondered what picking the old gentlemans pocket in play, had to
home,) and sometimes taking part in the game already described: which
At length, one morning, Oliver obtained the permission he had so
the old gentleman, by not going to work at all. The Dodger had a
his finger on his lip, drew his companions back again, with the
was not permitted to make any inquiries; for the two boys walked
turning over the leaf when he got to the bottom of a page, beginning at
veins from terror, that he felt as if he were in a burning fire; then,
saw Oliver running, than, guessing exactly how the matter stood, they
child his battledore. Away they run, pell-mell, helter-skelter,
drops of perspiration streaming down his face; strains every nerve to
the foremost of the pursuers.
thus have afforded another chase, had not a police officer (who is


Whats the matter now? said the man carelessly.
unlocked as he spoke, and which led into a stone cell.  Here he was
innocent cause of all this disturbance.

features bore a trace.  So, he heaved a sigh over the recollections he
no great quantity of hair, and what he had, growing on the back and
for the Home Department.  He was out of temper; and he looked up with
who would afford him the required information.
and that is, that I really never, without actual experience, could

and how that was all he knew about it.
very loud, just at the right moment; and the former dropped a heavy
Oh! yes, I dare say! said Mr. Fang, with a sneer.  Come, none of

At this point of the inquiry, Oliver raised his head; and, looking
Oliver availed himself of the kind permission, and fell to the floor in
of decent but poor appearance, clad in an old suit of black, rushed

here:  loitering on the opposite side of the way, when this gentleman

lesson to you, my man, or the law will overtake you yet.  The boy is
frame.

comfortably deposited; and here, he was tended with a kindness and
is not the place I went to sleep in.

seen me hurt, it would have made her sorrowful; and her face has always
pulse, and said he was a great deal better.
The old lady made a respectful inclination of the head, which seemed to
some dry toast without any butter.  Dont keep him too warm, maam; but
with him, drew her chair close to the fire and went off into a series

belonged to her.  Having him set, here, by the fire-side, the good old
up, in a little saucepan, a basin full of broth:  strong enough, Oliver
the machine for taking likenesses might have known that would never
It is so pretty, replied Oliver.
now, at all events.
contortions.  Oliver looked very worn and shadowy from sickness, and


I never told him so, sir, returned Oliver in amazement.
there!
in the hue-and-cry which was raised at Olivers heels, in consequence
any considerations of heart, or generous impulse and feeling. For,
pressure of a too mighty flow of ideas, are prone to indulge); still, I
just long enough to recover breath to speak, Master Bates uttered an
of iron as well as them, and me with the wipe in my pocket, singing out
in his merriment; for the Dodgers manner was impressive.  What should
The Dodger made no reply; but putting his hat on again, and gathering
of em?  Wheres the third?  They cant have got into trouble.  Hark!
the boy?

Charley Bates, at this moment, calling his attention by a perfectly
about five-and-thirty, in a black velveteen coat, very soiled drab
different places, skulked into the room.
sold you afterwards, for youre fit for nothing but keeping as a
about, as you do when you blab and--
This was said in jest; but if the speaker could have seen the evil leer

appeared plunged in his own reflections; not excepting the dog, who by




Accordingly, with a clean white apron tied over her gown, and her
his hands.
to them to follow the bright example they had just beheld.

Is there a little boy here? inquired Nancy, with a preliminary sob.
the street-door key and the little basket, demanded her own dear
have been committed by another boy, not in custody; and that the

A rap at the door startled him in this occupation.  Whos there? he

carefully avoided, both by the old gentleman and Mrs. Bedwin, in the
seemed to worry you, perhaps it might prevent your getting well, you
man, and lived in the country; and about a son, who was clerk to a
the noise and turbulence in the midst of which he had always lived, it
Brownlow, that if Oliver Twist felt pretty well, he should like to see



Thank you, sir, said Oliver.  At the earnest manner of his reply, the
again.  Let me stay here, and be a servant.  Dont send me back to the
delight of my life lie buried there too, I have not made a coffin of my
you.  Speak the truth, and you shall not be friendless while I live.
his manners; for he was a worthy creature at bottom, as he had reason
into which his countenance was twisted, defy description.  He had a
nearly every assertion he made; and it was the more singular in his

orange-peel on the pavement in our street; and I _know_ its put there
Thats the boy, replied Mr. Brownlow.
Dont know?

manner were unusually prepossessing; but he had a strong appetite for
humour; as Mr. Grimwig, at tea, was graciously pleased to express his
he was confused by Mr. Grimwigs looking so hard at him.

Call after him, said Mr. Brownlow; its particular.  He is a poor
Yes; do let me take them, if you please, sir, said Oliver. Ill run

Bless his sweet face! said the old lady, looking after him. I cant
The spirit of contradiction was strong in Mr. Grimwigs breast, at the
bad-hearted man, and though he would have been unfeignedly sorry to see
In the obscure parlour of a low public-house, in the filthiest part of
disturbed by the dogs winking, or whether his feelings were so wrought
deliberately opening with the other a large clasp-knife, which he drew
door suddenly opening, the dog darted out:  leaving Bill Sikes with the

laugh at the pleasantry of his friend.  He was obviously very ill at
Its all passed safe through the melting-pot, replied Fagin, and

in expectation of it, and shook his head in reply; so slightly that the


Sikes, turned the conversation to other matters. In about ten minutes
short a distance of the merry old gentleman, was on his way to the
Dont, cried Oliver, struggling.  Let go of me.  Who is it? What are
doctor.  To which, the butchers boy:  who appeared of a lounging, not
I am not, replied Oliver, greatly alarmed.  I dont know her. I
you young dog!  Come home directly.
at the garret-window.
forced along them at a pace which rendered the few cries he dared to
CHAPTER XVI
Oliver saw, but too plainly, that resistance would be of no avail.  He
Sikes, regarding the animal with a kind of grim and ferocious approval.

and din outside made the thundering old jail so silent, that I could
that was coming out to be hung, the next time eight oclock struck,
They walked on, by little-frequented and dirty ways, for a full
moments under a lamp.  A noise, as if a sash window were gently raised,
Wont he be glad to see you?  Oh, no!
The young gentleman did not stop to bestow any other mark of
cleft stick from the Dodger; and, advancing to Oliver, viewed him round
supper.
again.
give it here!
boisterous than the first.
his shaggy eyebrows into a hard knot.  Youre right, Oliver, youre
and tore wildly from the room:  uttering shrieks for help, which made
Shant he! said Sikes, setting his teeth.  Ill soon do that, if you


The girl stamped her foot violently on the floor as she vented this
her other strong passions, the fierce impulses of recklessness and
What do you mean by this? said Sikes; backing the inquiry with a very
The girl laughed again: even less composedly than before; and, darting
tone, and motioning towards the boys, who were eagerly attentive to all
me to them long ago, and thatll keep me there, day and night, day and
The Jew wiped his forehead: and smiled, as if it were a relief to have
Master Bates, apparently much delighted with his commission, took the

It is the custom on the stage, in all good murderous melodramas, to
Such changes appear absurd; but they are not so unnatural as they would
unnecessary.  If so, let it be considered a delicate intimation on the

house.
if they had heard it.
Mrs. Mann, I am going to London.
The Clerkinwell Sessions have brought it upon themselves, maam,

Mr. Bumble produced some silver money rolled up in paper, from his

loosely on his feeble body; and his young limbs had wasted away, like

put a few words down for me on a piece of paper, and fold it up and
children there together.
said Mrs. Mann, whimpering pathetically.
He experienced no other crosses on the way, than those which originated

carefully, three several times; and in something more than five minutes
Poor dear!  I knew we should!  I was certain of it.  Bless his heart!
Pray dont interrupt just now, said Mr. Brownlow.  Take a seat, will

caustically; after an attentive perusal of Mr. Bumbles features.
It would be tedious if given in the beadles words:  occupying, as it
favourable to the boy.
boy, Oliver, is an imposter.


pursue their customary avocations, Mr. Fagin took the opportunity of
person in question, had rendered it necessary that he should become the
the Jew on more occasions than one, he thought by no means unlikely,
left during the long hours to commune with his own thoughts.  Which,
Spiders had built their webs in the angles of the walls and ceilings;
shutter; and out of this, Oliver often gazed with a melancholy face for
this end and aim, he condescendingly commanded Oliver to assist him in
having his boots cleaned all the time, without even the past trouble of
They both smoked, for some seconds, in silence.
downiest one of the lot!
Hes an out-and-out Christian, said Charley.


of consideration for Fagin, cause the traps know that we work
Its naughty, aint it, Oliver? inquired Charley Bates. Hell come
again, resumed his pipe with tears in his eyes.

To be sure, to be sure! said the Jew, who had entered unseen by
Mr. Chitling was older in years than the Dodger: having perhaps
decidedly unlawful.  Mr. Chitling wound up his observations by stating

for the house of correction becomes fatiguing after a week or two.
now slowly instilling into his soul the poison which he hoped would
the street as quickly as he could.

voice demanded who was there.
Well, my dear, replied the Jew.--Ah! Nancy.
Mr. Sikes.  Give him something to drink, Nancy.  Burn my body, make
With a hoarse grunt of contempt, Mr. Sikes seized the glass, and threw
For business? inquired the Jew.
warnt the very first that thought about the robbery.  Wot dye mean?

Do you mean to tell me, Bill, said the Jew: softening as the other


Yes, said the Jew, as suddenly rousing himself.

both got; the second you must find us.

I tell you I do! replied Sikes.
No, no, my dear, I know youre not, said the Jew; but-- and again
Now, Fagin, said Nancy with a laugh.  Tell Bill at once, about
maynt be so much up, as any of the others; but thats not what you
for a penny, in for a pound.  You wont see him alive again, Fagin.

way--which would be dangerous, and we should lose by it besides.
Its all arranged about bringing off the swag, is it? asked the Jew.
observing, that, if he evinced any disinclination to the task, he would
yelling forth, at the same time, most unmusical snatches of song,

they descended the stairs.
CHAPTER XX
No, no, my dear.  Not to stop there, replied the Jew.  We shouldnt
Why, do you think? inquired Fagin, parrying the question.
And heres a book for you to read, till they come to fetch you.
nothing of blood when his own is up. Whatever falls out, say nothing;
was too well accustomed to suffering, and had suffered too much where
confessed their guilt, and yelled for the gibbet to end their agony.
poor outcast boy who had never known the love of friends or kindred, it
Put down the light, said the girl, turning away her head. It hurts
Nancy! cried Oliver, What is it?

feelings, and, for an instant, thought of appealing to her compassion
If ever you are to get loose from here, this is not the time.


Bill!
closing the door as he spoke.
himself down by the table, and stood the boy in front of him.

devil-and-all of trouble to explain matters to you, if it warnt for

and water, and threw himself on the bed; ordering Nancy, with many
breakfast.  It was not yet daylight; for the candle was still burning,
pistol in a side-pocket of his great-coat, clasped it firmly in his,
been very wet: large pools of water had collected in the road: and the
who, by keeping on the wrong side of the road, had endangered his
Turning down Sun Street and Crown Street, and crossing Finsbury square,
the oxen, the bleating of sheep, the grunting and squeaking of pigs,
were clear of the turmoil, and had made their way through Hosier Lane
came up.  Seeing Hounslow written on it, he asked the driver with as

upon him, and rapped the side-pocket with his fist, in a significant
They turned round to the left, a short way past the public-house; and
sat in a corner by themselves, without being much troubled by their
So, youre going on to Lower Halliford, are you? inquired Sikes.


he started off at great speed, and rattled out of the town right
beneath it.  There was a dull sound of falling water not far off; and
Sikes kept straight on, until they were close upon the bridge; then


individual who has been heretofore described as labouring under the
large brass buttons; an orange neckerchief; a coarse, staring,
rested on Oliver, Mr. Toby Crackit brought himself into a sitting
a long stare of astonishment.
advanced to the table, filled a glass with spirits, and drank off its

or wandering about the dark churchyard, or retracing some one or other
All right! replied Toby, stowing them away.  The persuaders?

that was floating about.  They crossed the bridge, and kept on towards
surrounded by a wall:  to the top of which, Toby Crackit, scarcely
failed him; and he sank upon his knees.
Ill do your business myself with a crack on the head.  That makes no
defend it more securely; but it was large enough to admit a boy of

upon him, put Oliver gently through the window with his feet first;
Whats that? whispered the other man.
not whether to advance or fly.

The night was bitter cold.  The snow lay on the ground, frozen into a
cheerful fire in her own little room, and glanced, with no small degree
spoon (private property) into the inmost recesses of a two-ounce tin
small teapot, and the single cup, had awakened in her mind sad


maam, but ask for a few coals; if its only a pocket handkerchief
very much, our overseer sent him out a pound of potatoes and half a
thing, any way, Mr. Bumble?  Youre a gentleman of experience, and
rule now, Mrs. Corney, all over the country. But, however, said the
enough to cut ones ears off.
Mr. Bumble coughed--louder this time than he had coughed yet.
You have a cat, maam, I see, said Mr. Bumble, glancing at one who,
with his teaspoon, I mean to say this, maam; that any cat, or kitten,
she took it; and inflicting two open-handed slaps upon his laced
great public functionaries, but more particularly beneath the
Now, if the matron had moved her chair to the right, she would have
kissed the matron.
of a sudden surprise in counteracting the effects of extreme fear, that
you come, mistress.
distinct times round the table.
matrons room.  Her body was bent by age; her limbs trembled with
The old crone tottered along the passages, and up the stairs, muttering
tones, and dropping a curtsey as she spoke.

resumed her seat by the side of the other nurse, who had by this time
Did she say any more, Anny dear, while I was gone? inquired the
Looking cautiously round, to ascertain that they were not overheard,
more into her own.  While they were thus employed, the matron, who had
wake again but once--and mind, mistress, that wont be for long!
down!
door, and returned to the bedside.  On being excluded, the old ladies
Never mind the year, said the impatient auditor; what about her?

face.  Poor girl! poor girl!  She was so young, too! Such a gentle

Stone dead! said one of the old women, hurrying in as soon as the

time, as occasion served, he bestowed a variety of earnest glances:
companion upon these improprieties; all of which remonstrances, Master

had enough.  That ere Dodger has such a run of luck that theres no
piece of chalk which had served him in lieu of counters; whistling,
_I_ should say, replied Master Bates, with a grin, that he was



violent roar, that the abused Mr. Chitling, without any preliminary


afore the old file now.



The boy!
IN WHICH A MYSTERIOUS CHARACTER APPEARS UPON THE SCENE; AND MANY
Near to the spot on which Snow Hill and Holborn Hill meet, opens, upon
linen, rust and rot in the grimy cellars.
The neighbourhood was a little too hot, Lively, said Fagin, elevating
Yes, theres some half-dozen of em gone in, that I knows. I dont

upstairs, and opening the door of a room, and softly insinuating
office in his hand; while a professional gentleman with a bluish nose,
house,) a coarse, rough, heavy built fellow, who, while the songs were
life; formed the darkest and saddest portion of this dreary picture.
No, replied the man.
Hush! said the Jew.  Yes.
I say, said the other, looking over the rails, and speaking in a
residence, and performed the short remainder of the distance, on foot.
narrowly, as she inquired to his recital of Toby Crackits story.  When

have him away from my eyes, and to know that the worst is over.  I
companions unexpected obstinacy, and the vexation of the night, I
only wants the will, and has the power to, to--
Dont worry me now, Fagin! replied the girl, raising her head
glistening eye steadily upon her.
the justice of the Jews supposition; and when, after indulging in the


Nothing bad, I hope? said the stranger, stopping short, and turning a
Its as dark as the grave, said the man, groping forward a few steps.
upstairs.
reflection on the opposite wall.
Only hear him! exclaimed the Jew, shrugging his shoulders.
good friend?
trembled for us all.
girls are, Monks, well.  As soon as the boy begins to harden, shell

forward when I saw it first; and when I spoke, it darted away.
in, to prevent any intrusion on the conference.
MOST UNCEREMONIOUSLY
exalted rank, and (by consequence) great virtues, imperatively claim at
sustainable claim.
to make himself acquainted with the contents of the three long drawers:
hurrying into the room, threw herself, in a breathless state, on a
Its dreadful to think of! said the lady, shuddering.



This is a very comfortable room, maam, said Mr. Bumble looking
beadle, affectionately pressing her hand.



of em had dared to lift his wulgar eyes to that lovely countenance--
and, having exchanged a long and affectionate embrace with his future
attracting no attention, and beholding a light shining through the
with which he took his oysters, for which nothing but a strong
Not overmuch, replied Charlotte.  I like to see you eat em, Noah
suffering his legs to reach the ground, gazed at the beadle in drunken
makes all manner of love!
made all necessary preparations for the old womans funeral, let us set
of the wounded boy across his bended knee; and turned his head, for an


The dogs, who, in common with their masters, seemed to have no
Certainly, replied the shorter man; and whatever Mr. Giles says, it
Youre a lie, Brittles, said Mr. Giles.
So am I, said Brittles; only theres no call to tell a man he is, so
upon the cause of this sudden change in their temperament.
all three remembered that they had come in sight of the robbers at the
light should inform the thieves in what direction to fire.  Catching up
first dull hue--the death of night, rather than the birth of
head to foot, fell prostrate on the ground.
talking to them. Then, he was alone with Sikes, plodding on as on the
which perhaps he could reach.  Pitying his condition, they might have
for the instant, he forgot the agony of his wound, and thought only of
make all men equals; so Mr. Giles sat with his legs stretched out


and looking very hard at the cook and housemaid, got softly out of
_Was_ he frightened? asked the cook.
Mr. Giles had risen from his seat, and taken two steps with his eyes
Mr. Giles, as he spoke, looked at Brittles; but that young man, being
it was now broad day, took their way upstairs; with the dogs in front.

of his mouth, so that his voice might travel the better.
thieves did.  Is the poor creature much hurt?
Brittles was to saddle the pony and betake himself instantly to

leg advanced, and his right hand thrust into his waist-coat, while his
in mortal forms, they may be, without impiety, supposed to abide in
back her hair, which was simply braided on her forehead; and threw into
fast one.
Mrs. Maylie--bless my soul--in the silence of the night, too--I _never_
established custom of gentlemen in the housebreaking way to transact
Honour, eh? said the doctor; well, I dont know; perhaps its as
going upstairs, the reader may be informed, that Mr. Losberne, a
This is a very extraordinary thing, Mrs. Maylie, said the doctor,
I beg your pardon, maam, interposed Mr. Giles; but I was going to

With many loquacious assurances that they would be agreeably surprised
pain and exhaustion, and sunk into a deep sleep.  His wounded arm,
familiar word, will sometimes call up sudden dim remembrances of scenes
head; crime, like death, is not confined to the old and withered
for mercys sake, think of this, before you let them drag this sick
save him, sir?

I might avail myself, on the spot, of such a favourable opportunity for
be left to his fate, without any farther interference on my part, at
The patience of the two ladies was destined to undergo a longer trial
our fellow-creatures, we bestowed but one thought on the dark evidences
for being weak all at once, betook himself downstairs to open upon Mr.
entered; Mr. Brittles, with a mug of ale in his hand, was corroborating
How is the patient to-night, sir? asked Giles.
And what are _you_, boy? said the doctor, turning sharply upon

Heres the house broken into, said the doctor, and a couple of men
Brittles looked doubtfully at Mr. Giles; Mr. Giles looked doubtfully at
Yes, replied Brittles; I sent a message up by the coachman, and I
Open the door, replied a man outside; its the officers from Bow
of great admiration.  This done, they returned to the house, and, being
This was addressed to Mr. Losberne, who now made his appearance; that
are the circumstances?

What he says is quite correct, observed Blathers, nodding his head in
Lights were then procured; and Messrs. Blathers and Duff, attended by
point in medicine, would be mere childs play.
probabilities, his story is a very doubtful one.
been the companion of thieves for some time past; he has been carried

be cast upon it, must interfere, materially, with your benevolent plan


to him.



Conkey had hit the robber; for there was traces of blood, all the way
of a heap, that you might have fractured my skull with a toothpick,"
occurrence, but he warnt to be seen nowhere, so they went back to the

can walk upstairs.
grounds, at the back here, comes to the house for assistance this
am not of an inhuman disposition, sir.

that if the officers had any doubts upon the subject, they would
Mr. Giles had really hit anybody; and upon examination of the fellow
suspicious circumstances; and to Kingston Messrs. Blathers and Duff
he should ever be called upon; and Blathers and Duff, being rewarded

however slight, which would prove to them that their gentle kindness
watching your birds, or running up and down the whole day long, to make
would delight me, more than you can well imagine.  Do you understand

house!
nearly fell forward into the passage. Whats the matter here?
grasp, growled forth a volley of horrid oaths, and retired into the
What do you want, then? demanded the hunchback.  Will you take
up again.  With these words he flung the hunchback a piece of money,

anything but impulse all through his life, and it was no bad compliment
into it, his heart beat so violently, that he could scarcely draw his

sank feebly backward.
My poor boy, this is disappointment enough for one day, said the
far, and carried with them the belief that he was an impostor and a
Who can describe the pleasure and delight, the peace of mind and soft
foretaste of heaven itself has soothed their quick decline, and they
brawling, seemed to enter on a new existence there.  The rose and
happy thoughts.  Every morning he went to a white-headed old gentleman,
and gentle voice, some old song which it pleased her aunt to hear.
heard in church before.  Then, there were the walks as usual, and many
charity to execute in the village; or, failing that, there was rare
young and sensitive heart, was repaid by their pride in, and attachment
open and naked spots into choice nooks, where was a deep and pleasant
customary with them:  for the day had been unusually warm, and there
Rose, my love! cried Mrs. Maylie, rising hastily, and bending over
her hands, she sank upon a sofa, and gave vent to the tears which she
a heavy wildness came over the soft blue eye.  Again this disappeared,
The old lady motioned to him not to speak; and sitting herself down in
Amen to that, my child! said the old lady, wringing her hands.
about her.  I am sure--certain--quite certain--that, for your sake, who




hearing what he wanted, referred him to the ostler; who after hearing
paving of the market-place, was out of the town, and galloping along
Death! muttered the man to himself, glaring at the boy with his large

had taken Mrs. Maylie aside, and pronounced her disorder to be one of a
while the life of one we dearly love, is trembling in the balance!  Oh!
shuddering to see the darkened window, looking as if death lay
overhead; so much of life and joyousness in all; that, when the boy

When he reached home Mrs. Maylie was sitting in the little parlour.
What of Rose? cried the old lady.  Tell me at once!  I can bear it;

insupportable load of anguish which had been taken from his breast.
up his horses.  Then, the nightcap once again appeared: and the same

all for many years to come.  I heard him say so.


Mrs. Maylie was anxiously waiting to receive her son when he reached
happiness would have been effectually blighted, and that your arrival
strict line of duty.
him:  he may, no matter how generous and good his nature, one day
view, no hope in life, beyond her; and if you oppose me in this great
I _have_ considered! was the impatient reply; Mother, I have

to her.  God bless you!


commission in your favour.  Just step into this corner a moment, will
Giles, pulling out his shirt-frill, replied, No, no; and that if they
made Harry laugh almost as heartily, by the very force of sympathy.
and bright. Such is the influence which the condition of our own
ladys chamber was opened now; for she loved to feel the rich summer
gentleman, and laboured so hard that his quick progress surprised even
books.  He had been poring over them for some time; and, as the day had
matter of impossibility to separate the two.  Nor is this, the most
him, and whispering to another man, with his face averted, who sat


Olivers history from his mother, understood it at once.
just then returned, tumbled over the hedge after them, and picking
There was the village in the hollow on the left; but, in order to gain
The very same man I told you of, who came so suddenly upon me at the
long; but it was trodden down nowhere, save where their own feet had
furnished with the best description Oliver could give of the appearance
the hearts of all.
speak with her for a few moments.
wish you had.
naturally, with the loveliest things in nature.
and apprehensions, and selfish regrets, lest you should die, and never
nature that exists:  than the struggle to win such a heart as yours,



happiness to know that I once held the high place in your regard which
are proud; and I will neither mingle with such as may hold in scorn the
Do not press me to reply, answered Rose.  The question does not
should have been spared this trial.  I have every reason to be happy,
Not to press me to alter my right determination, replied Rose, with a


Thats a fine fellow, said the doctor; you shall come and see me
whether the race be for place, cup, or sweepstakes.

happy and quite well. You understand me?
The doctor was in the chaise; Giles (who, it had been arranged, should
disappearing, and now becoming visible again, as intervening objects,
the same direction, seemed to tell more of sorrow than of joy.
net-work, Mr. Bumble would heave a deep sigh, while a more gloomy

It seems a age.
Mr. Bumble turned, and encountered the face of his interesting consort,
whether the late Mrs. Corney was particularly proof against eagle
sneeze, laugh, or cry, as the humour strikes me; such being my
Mrs. Bumble, seeing at a glance, that the decisive moment had now

The first proof he experienced of the fact, was conveyed in a hollow
Mr. Bumble rose with a very rueful countenance:  wondering much what

visited with no punishment at all, but rather rewarded as meritorious


person.
gate for him (for he had reached the portal in his reverie); and
haggardness in his look, as well as by the dusty soils on his dress, to
very remarkable expression of the strangers eye, which was keen and
it.  I would recommend you not to ask for it.
Just so, rejoined the other, nodding his head.  It was in that
perplexity, is not more averse to turning an honest penny when he can,
The host smiled, disappeared, and shortly afterwards returned with a
coins, to see that they were genuine, and had put them up, with much
And the place, the crazy hole, wherever it was, in which miserable
it--and who afterwards ran away to London, as it was supposed.
What do you mean? demanded the stranger, sternly.
Sallys death, which the occurrences of that day had given him good
Only through me, rejoined Mr. Bumble.
repetition of the hour of appointment for the following night.

They were both wrapped in old and shabby outer garments, which might,
plunder and crime.  It was a collection of mere hovels:  some, hastily
manufactory of some kind.  It had, in its day, probably furnished


What the devil made you stand lingering there, in the wet? said

her, Im not afraid of her telling it to anybody; not I!  Do you
Hear it! he cried, shrinking back.  Hear it!  Rolling and crashing
beams in the ceiling:  and which cast a dim light upon an old table and



Not a large sum for a paltry secret, that may be nothing when its
Not alone, my dear, nor unprotected, neither, submitted Mr. Bumble,
the purpose.

falling directly upon them, aggravated the paleness and anxiety of

stole from the corpse, when it had hardly turned to one, that which the
She didnt utter another word, said the woman, to all appearance
money to pay the pawnbrokers interest year by year, and prevent its
It has the word "Agnes" engraved on the inside, said the woman.

What do you propose to do with it?  Can it be used against me?
himself, impelled by curiousity, ventured to do the same. The turbid
Monks drew the little packet from his breast, where he had hurriedly
By all means, observed Mr. Bumble, with great alacrity.
lantern from that which Monks had detached from the rope, and now

in the last chapter, disposed of their little matter of business as
bespoke a state of extreme poverty; while the meagre and attenuated
already figured in this tale, but for the voice in which she replied to
hear me?
to her voice: such a number of nights as Ive been patient with you,

stand chattering and grinning at me!
These united restoratives, administered with great energy: especially
In compliance with Mr. Fagins request, the Artful untied this bundle,
richest sort you ever lushed!

Hold your din, cried Sikes, as the dog retreated under the bed: still
off a piece of that pie, one of you boys, to take the taste of that out
of your having such a handy girl about you?
you to-night.
presently.
attended by Nancy and the boys:  Mr. Sikes, meanwhile, flinging himself
Not a living leg, answered Mr. Crackit, pulling up his collar; its
didnt value his losses the snap of his little finger.
Fagin? pursued Tom.
as they went, in many witticisms at the expense of Mr. Chitling; in

dear.
there had been any bystander to observe the change, he could hardly
perhaps fearing she might say something aloud about the money, if he

Nothing that I know of, except sitting in this close place for I dont
something she was bent upon, wrung her hands, and burst into tears.
It was fortunate for her that the possession of money occasioned him so
very unlikely to have awakened his suspicions.

I tell you wot it is, said Sikes; if you havent caught the fever,
with her back towards him; and held the vessel to his lips, while he
profound trance.
Has it long gone the half-hour? asked the girl.

paces as though irresolute, and making up her mind to advance; but the
only by a look of virtuous disdain; and summoned a man to answer her.
make that a job that two of you wont like to do.  Isnt there anybody
fervour, that the creature was a disgrace to her sex; and strongly
out of doors as an impostor.
Brass can do better than the gold what has stood the fire, said the
A STRANGE INTERVIEW, WHICH IS A SEQUEL TO THE LAST CHAMBER
jails and hulks, living within the shadow of the gallows itself,--even
I am very sorry if any one has behaved harshly to you, replied Rose.

heard of, that lives among the thieves, and that never from the first
be my deathbed.
I never heard the name, said Rose.
should have a certain sum; and he was to have more for making him a
these:  "So the only proofs of the boys identity lie at the bottom of
yours, that if he could gratify his hatred by taking the boys life
of thousands of pounds would you not give, if you had them, to know who
companions you paint in such terrible colors?  If you repeat this
might yet be reclaimed.  Oh! said the earnest girl, folding her hands

every suffering and ill usage; and I should be, I believe, if I knew
secret, and advise you what to do, rejoined the girl.

the coffinlid, and no friend in sickness or death but the hospital

CHAPTER XLI
for some weeks to a distant part of the coast.  It was now midnight of
even if she had known how to do so, it was scarcely to be thought of,
may come himself, and studiously abstain from meeting me--he did when
Oh dear!  To think that I should see him at last, and you should be
up to him.  But Giles asked, for me, whether he lived there, and they

with great politeness, I beg your pardon, young lady--I imagined it
Mr. Brownlow inclined his head.  Mr. Grimwig, who had made one very
a great crash, and falling back in his chair, discharged from his
any evidence which will alter the unfavourable opinion I was once
dont see the application of that remark.
And hed uncommonly like to see any man offer to do it, responded Mr.
few natural words, all that had befallen Oliver since he left Mr.
without another word.
seat, Mr. Brownlow returned, accompanied by Oliver, whom Mr. Grimwig
time of life, dont improve with age, sir.
He would come back--I knew he would, said the old lady, holding him
her friend Mr. Losberne in the first instance.  The old gentleman
outbreak, have carried the intention into effect without a moments


How? inquired the doctor.
you think it reasonable that this promise to the girl should be
quiet, and keep these matters secret even from Oliver himself.
I have no objection to your calling in your friend if I may call in
success.  I will spare neither trouble nor expense in behalf of the
and entered into some dark conspiracy to thrust him forth upon the
her self-imposed mission to Rose Maylie, there advanced towards London,
extent, enabled him with much ease to keep some half-dozen paces in

Claypole; for he it was; but get up and come on, or Ill kick yer, and

go and lose myself among the narrowest streets I can find, and not stop
Did I keep it? asked Mr. Claypole.
In pursuance of this cautious plan, Mr. Claypole went on, without
appearance and more dirty than any he had yet seen; and, having crossed
There was nobody in the bar but a young Jew, who, with his two elbows
recommended us here, said Noah, nudging Charlotte, perhaps to call her

Hush! said Barney:  stradegers id the next roob.
Aha! he whispered, looking round to Barney, I like that fellows
aint to be emptied every day, and people to get clear off after it.
deceitful creetur as yer can be when I let yer.
with an aspect of deep wisdom; and having well shaken its contents,
from Noahs shoes to those of his companion, and from them to the two

I didnt take it, stammered Noah, no longer stretching out his legs
a fancy to you and the young woman; so Ive said the word, and you may

Quite perfect, rejoined Fagin, clapping him on the shoulder. Youre
Regular town-maders? asked Mr. Claypole.
worth much to him.  Itll have to go abroad, and he couldnt sell it
Fagin.
Ah! something of that sort, replied Noah.  What do you think would
What do you think, then? asked Noah, anxiously regarding him.



but a gentleman who appreciated the dignity of a special appointment on
insinuating grin.  He hasnt as good a one as himself anywhere.


his hands; only consider.  Youve done whats a very pretty thing, and
Of course it is, replied Mr. Bolter.  What do yer talk about such
mere compliment, but that he had really impressed his recruit with a

the Dodger.
Fagin was about to translate these mysterious expressions into the
a hatband, to wisit him in, afore he sets out upon his travels.  To
or come near him on any scent!  Eh?
Bolter in a fit of chuckling which shook him as though he had the

it, Fagin?  I say, how the Artful would bother em wouldnt he?
disposition, that Master Bates, who had at first been disposed to


that he incurred no possible danger in visiting the police-office;
garnished with turnpike tickets; and a carters whip.  Thus equipped,


unpleasant than the thick greasy scum on every inanimate object that
hat in his right hand, preceded the jailer, with a rolling gait
this here business?  I shall thank the madgstrates to dispose of this
What is this? inquired one of the magistrates.
Now then, where are the witnesses? said the clerk.
disengaged himself from the crowd before referred to.  He had also
abstraction.  Did you redress yourself to me, my man?
There!  Hes fully committed! interposed the clerk. Take him away.


he had so long eluded, and he should fall at last--richly as he merited
She grew pale and thin, even within a few days.  At times, she took no
An hour this side of midnight, said Sikes, raising the blind to look
Thats the way to talk, my dear, replied Fagin, venturing to pat him
Reminds me of being nabbed by the devil, returned Sikes. There never


violent outbreak.  Let me go, will you,--this minute--this instant.
hour--do--do!


on my back; and you, like a blackhearted wolf as you are, kept yourself
minutes, the girl subsided into her accustomed demeanour. Whispering
What do you mean? replied the girl, in the same tone.

added to these, her desperate impatience to leave home that night at a
she would consent to poison him?  Women have done such things, and
that was one of the chief ends to be attained. How, thought Fagin, as
the spot where he had left the bolder villain; and went on his way:

woman, because I wanted us to be alone.




Of course, of course, replied Noah.  Where is she? Where am I to
not be back much before daybreak.  Come with me. Quick!
the adjoining room.

other side.
THE APPOINTMENT KEPT
over the parapet the better to conceal his figure, he suffered her to

crowded city.  The palace, the night-cellar, the jail, the madhouse:
immediately; for a man in the garments of a countryman came close

spy to penetrate the motives of an interview so different from what he


passed me often.
as I am to-night, and preached of flames and vengeance, cried the

laudanum before I came away.


Then, said the gentleman, quickly, as if this had been the point he
I think, which would induce you to yield it.
After receiving an assurance from both, that she might safely do so,
shoulder, first on one side, and then on the other. Dont forget that,
to know him by.  Stay though, she added.  Upon his throat:  so high
As he expressed himself to this effect, with assumed carelessness, he
Nothing, sir, rejoined the girl, weeping.  You can do nothing to
would not have you go back to exchange one word with any old companion,
again.  I must go home.
What, cried the young lady, can be the end of this poor creatures


After a time she arose, and with feeble and tottering steps ascended
FATAL CONSEQUENCES
toothless gums a few such fangs as should have been a dogs or rats.
of Fagin, as every evil thought and blackest purpose lay working at his
and do the most you can with it.  Its been trouble enough to get; I
moment gone.
Aye? returned the robber with an incredulous air.  Tell away! Look





So she did.


Bill, Bill! cried Fagin, following him hastily.  A word. Only a
You wont be--too--violent, Bill?
them to the ground, but looking straight before him with savage

dragged her into the middle of the room, and looking once towards the
for dear Gods sake, for your own, for mine, stop before you spill my
time!
to the wall, and shutting out the sight with his hand, seized a heavy
life, and hope, and freshness to man--burst upon the crowded city in
such flesh, and so much blood!
shut the door softly, locked it, took the key, and left the house.
foot-path across the fields, skirted Caen Wood, and so came on
most peoples way.  Thither he directed his steps,--running sometimes,
It was nine oclock at night, when the man, quite tired out, and the
present declaring him to have been quite young--not older, one
supper, and opened his box of treasures, when he ingeniously contrived
need to bolt one little square, and he has put it beyond question--for
Wine-stains, fruit-stains, beer-stains, water-stains, paint-stains,
the table, and tearing the hat from him, burst out of the house.
Thats for your people, said the guard.  Now, look alive in there,
pray, sir?

wind came laden with that last low cry.  If he stopped it did the same.
Let no man talk of murderers escaping justice, and hint that Providence
were everywhere.  If he shut out the sight, there came the room with
open air.
He came upon the spot.  There were half-dressed figures tearing to and
men were thickest.  Up and down the ladders, upon the roofs of
murder.  He has gone to Birmingham, they say, said one:  but theyll

purpose, or the robbers sidelong look at him was sterner than

 The twilight was beginning to close in, when Mr. Brownlow
moves a finger but as you bid him, drag him into the street, call for
stood beside him.
you to a punishment the extent of which, although I can, with a

This is pretty treatment, sir, said Monks, throwing down his hat and
unworthiness who bear the name.

I dont care for hard names, interrupted Monks with a jeering laugh.
Well, they were separated, said Monks, and what of that?
repeat, a boy, when _his_ father ordered him to marry. Must I go back


died the day after her arrival, leaving no will--_no will_--so that the


cast in my way by a stronger hand than chance, and rescued by me from a

being dead, I knew that you alone could solve the mystery if anybody
And now you do see me, said Monks, rising boldly, what then? Fraud
in your own words to your accomplice the Jew, "_the only proofs of the
you and this detested villain, is known to me.  Shadows on the wall
Set your hand to a statement of truth and facts, and repeat it before
brother is concerned, and then go where you please.  In this world you
or will be, there, under cover of the darkness.  Spies are hovering
When I last heard, he had not been taken, but he will be, or is, by
intelligence with my previous knowledge, and the result of our good

To reach this place, the visitor has to penetrate through a maze of
pavement, dismantled walls that seem to totter as he passes, chimneys
water up; and when his eye is turned from these operations to the
into the streets; the chimneys are blackened, but they yield no smoke.
years, whose nose had been almost beaten in, in some old scuffle, and
very ex-clusive as I have done, and by that means has a snug house over
When was Fagin took then?
Wots come of young Bates? demanded Kags.

like one distracted.

If he had, said Kags, the dog ud want to lead us away to where he
murdered woman lay in the next room.

He laid his hand upon a chair which stood in the middle of the room,

addressed, after some hesitation.

looking, with horror in his eyes, upon the murderers face.  You
gesticulation, the boy actually threw himself, single-handed, upon the
bridge.  One man on horseback seemed to be among the crowd; for there
door!

shoot him dead.  Among them all, none showed such fury as the man on

back; and thus, when the murderer emerged at last on the house-top by
which all their previous shouting had been whispers.  Again and again

thronged pell-mell to the spot they had left:  each man crushing and
determined to make one last effort for his life by dropping into the
before-mentioned (who had clung so tight to the railing of the bridge
The old chimney quivered with the shock, but stood it bravely. The
AFFORDING AN EXPLANATION OF MORE MYSTERIES THAN ONE, AND COMPREHENDING
Brownlow with the nature of the admissions which had been forced from
But if Oliver, under these influences, had remained silent while they
between her own.  You shall tell him how happy you are, and how rich
with me.  He said "God bless you" to me when I ran away, cried the boy
foolish, then cried, then laughed again--there were scores of faces at
bedrooms ready, and everything was arranged as if by magic.
were to hear no more that night, Mr. Losberne and Mr. Grimwig entered
have almost done enough, I think.  Dont keep me here.
In the workhouse of this town, was the sullen reply. You have the
that it was not to be forwarded till after he was dead.  One of these
of the day he had given her the little locket and the ring with her
left you, and your mother, each an annuity of eight hundred pounds.
My mother, said Monks, in a louder tone, did what a woman should
of the narrative.
would not believe that the girl had destroyed herself, and the child
being rescued:  and that a dispute on this head had led to their visit
a-grieving for you--
I will do my endeavours, sir, replied Mr. Bumble.  How do you do,
Nor sold him anything, perhaps?
You shut the door the night old Sally died, said the foremost one,
often, long ago, that the young mother had told her that, feeling she

your wife acts under your direction.
If they have--I do not know how they can, but if they have--any
Brownlow.  What was the fate of the other--the child?
She took it, did she?
remained there and was happy.  I lost sight of her, two or three years

even grief itself arose so softened, and clothed in such sweet and
Stay, said Rose.  You _do_ know all.
whose goodness saved me from a life of indigence and suffering, when
Then why inflict it on yourself? said Harry, taking her hand. Think,
What do you mean! she faltered.
      *      *      *      *      *
the doctor and Mr. Brownlow:  some people affirm that Harry Maylie had

distinctness every word that fell from the presiding judge, who was
to their eyes:  and others whispering their neighbours with looks
out, as though to see which way the greater number leant; but that was
too, who had gone out, some half an hour before, and now come back.  He
think again.
demand was made; but it was twice repeated before he seemed to hear it,
They led him through a paved room under the court, where some prisoners
and bedstead; and casting his blood-shot eyes upon the ground, tried to
dangling heaps of clothes!
Then came the night--dark, dismal, silent night.  Other watchers are
Saturday night.  He had only one night more to live.  And as he thought
to sit there, eyeing him alone; and so the two kept watch together.
such unspeakable anguish, not only from the eyes, but, too often, and

now.
noise of hammering, and the throwing down of boards.  They were
he continued to mutter, without appearing conscious of their presence
Fagin, said the jailer.
the furthest corner of the seat, he demanded to know what they wanted
hope of any further gain.  Where are those papers?

No other question, replied Mr. Brownlow.  If I hoped we could recall


those on whom the warmest affections and tenderest cares of a
once more fell into his old courses, and, after undergoing a long
feeling; and would have turned quite peevish if he had known how.  For
carpenters, with great ardour; doing everything in a very singular and
his profession not altogether as safe a one as he could wish:  was, for
he has not even spirits to be thankful for being separated from his
having a contented disposition, and a good purpose, succeeded in the
hear the low tones of her sweet voice in the moonlit evening walk; I
seeds of all he wished him to become--how he traced in him new traits
earth, to visit spots hallowed by the love--the love beyond the

pen is laid down at the close of a two-years imaginative task; or how
DAVID COPPERFIELD.
Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life, or whether that

in sherry, but declined to be guaranteed from drowning on any higher
water in her life, except upon a bridge; and that over her tea (to which
me; and something stranger yet in the shadowy remembrance that I have
was strongly suspected of having beaten Miss Betsey, and even of having
My father had once been a favourite of hers, I believe; but she was
spirits, looking at it through her tears, and desponding heavily about
When she reached the house, she gave another proof of her identity.
come and open the door. My mother went.

was told, and did it with such nervous hands that her hair (which was

some weatherbeaten ragged old rooks-nests, burdening their higher
head to foot! Calls a house a rookery when theres not a rook near it,
twilight was by this time shading down into darkness; and dimly as they
Of course it will, said Miss Betsey. Its nothing but fancy. What do
and got herself named Peggotty? Its her surname, said my mother,
doubt it will be a girl. I have a presentiment that it must be a girl.
as if her own old wrongs were working within her, and she repressed any



This argument had some share in quieting my mother, though her

knowing nothing about her, and my mother saying nothing about her,
couldnt have thrown a word at a mad dog. He might have offered him one
he repeated sweetly:
Ba--a--ah! said my aunt, with a perfect shake on the contemptuous
absolutely could not bear it. It was really calculated to break his
his hair, made light of his linen, stopped his ears as if she confounded
mollify her.

aunt like an amiable bird.
tremendous region whence I had so lately travelled; and the light upon
peck her in preference to apples.
rather, as I generally observe such men to retain a certain freshness,

store-room opens out of it, and that is a place to be run past at
with the dead all lying in their graves at rest, below the solemn moon.
and frowns to me, as I stand upon the seat, that I am to look at the
and if so, how he likes to be reminded of it once a week. I look from
padlock; where the fruit clusters on the trees, riper and richer than
Peggotty and I were sitting one night by the parlour fire, alone. I
thimble on her finger; at herself, whom I thought lovely. I felt so


subject.

beautiful black hair and whiskers, who had walked home with us from

laughing. Shake hands!
contrary to her usual habit, instead of coming to the elbow-chair by the
asleep but that I could hear voices, without hearing what they said.
and say such bitter things to me, when you are well aware that I
disfigure myself with a burn, or a scald, or something of that sort? I
wouldnt buy myself a new parasol, though that old green one is frayed
elbow-chair, and made it up with me.
she plucked it for him, and gave it into his hand. He said he would
jealousy of him; but if I had any reason for it beyond a childs
idea of the ride so much himself, as he stood snorting and pawing at the
sit in front of him without turning my head sometimes, and looking up in

Davy who? said the gentleman. Jones?
I was quite relieved to find that it was only Brooks of Sheffield; for,
bell for some sherry in which to drink to Brooks. This he did; and when
cabin, and were busy with some papers. I saw them quite hard at work,
sure of his not being displeased; and that once when Mr. Passnidge (the
supposed he must be a manufacturer in the knife and fork way.
What was it they said, Davy? Tell me again. I cant believe it.
Yes it was. Pretty little widow.
about to mention; but it was probably about two months afterwards.
Then theres the sea; and the boats and ships; and the fishermen; and

expected, my mother entered into it readily; and it was all arranged

it was of his. Peggotty, who was also looking back on the other side,
and shuffled along, with his head down, as if he liked to keep people
her do it, that one defenceless woman could have snored so much.
so much mixed up, like toast and water, it would have been nicer. But

and Peggotty carrying another small box of ours, we turned down lanes

It was beautifully clean inside, and as tidy as possible. There was a
of the most enviable possessions that the world could afford. There
in this delightful house, was the smell of fish; which was so searching,
in a sumptuous manner off boiled dabs, melted butter, and potatoes, with

red.
fortunes with the dirty cards, and was printing off fishy impressions of
Who gave him that name, then? said I, putting question number two of
else there. I was so curious to know, that I made up my mind to have it

bed. Then, in the privacy of my own little cabin, she informed me that


I hope it wasnt the boat that--
some differences between Emlys orphanhood and mine, it appeared. She
Good? said Emly. If I was ever to be a lady, Id give him a sky-blue

with an awful recollection of her drowned relations. However, I said
I dare say, accurately as it was that day, and little Emly springing
and if her preservation could have depended on a motion of my hand, I
stopped under the lee of the lobster-outhouse to exchange an innocent
We used to walk about that dim old flat at Yarmouth in a loving manner,
they might have had in a pretty toy, or a pocket model of the Colosseum.
more, she had known in the morning he would go there.
snuggest in the place, as her chair was certainly the easiest, but it
Gummidge said she felt it more than we did, and shed tears again, and

Peggotty.
am a lone lorn creetur, and not only that everythink goes contrary with

said in a whisper:
So the fortnight slipped away, varied by nothing but the variation of
from Mr. Peggotty and Mrs. Gummidge, but my agony of mind at leaving
This gained upon me as we went along; so that the nearer we drew, the

Somethings the matter, Im sure. Wheres mama?




give evidence, I might appeal to it at this day--who sleeps there now,
dreadfully in love with little Emly, and had been torn away from her to
Davy, my child!
may you never be truly sorry!

down, together. My friend, turning a darkening face on Peggotty, when
to hear my heart beat fast and high.


freedom in my childish tread--but the word was not spoken, and the time
escape to Peggotty without having the hardihood to slip away, lest
she had carried them to that account. She brought with her two
Generally speaking, said Miss Murdstone, I dont like boys. How dye
the looking-glass in formidable array.
to this hour, looking for that man) before anybody in the house was
thing in future.
its very well for you to talk about firmness, but you wouldnt like it
there was no other firmness upon earth.

tomorrow.

There is no extent of mere weakness, Clara, said Mr. Murdstone in
is not a fit scene for the boy--David, go to bed!
Murdstone, or without having first ascertained by some sure means, what
in a black velvet gown, that looks as if it had been made out of a pall,
mother and at me, and whispering. Again, as the three go on arm-in-arm,
firmness, which was the bane of both our lives. I believe I was kept

it into her hand, and start off aloud at a racing pace while I have

for a long time. Miss Murdstone does the same. My mother glances
Clara!
the evening.
held that they contaminated one another.
Nights, and the Tales of the Genii,--and did me no harm; for whatever
being beset by savages, and resolved to sell his life at a great price.
with Mr. Pickle, in the parlour of our little village alehouse.

poise, and another switch; and having finished his preparation of it,

stop her ears then, and I heard her crying.
the same instant I caught the hand with which he held me in my mouth,
up from the floor, and saw my face in the glass, so swollen, red, and
went to bed; and, there, I began to wonder fearfully what would be done
Murdstone excepted, during the whole time--except at evening prayers in
my solitude and disgrace--the uncertain pace of the hours, especially
in a whisper. I started up in bed, and putting out my arms in the dark,

deal, I didnt hear them.
Then Peggotty fitted her mouth close to the keyhole, and delivered these
take as much care of your mama, Davy. As ever I took of you. And I wont
breast a feeling for Peggotty which I cannot very well define. She did
Oh, Davy! she said. That you could hurt anyone I love! Try to be
was taken out to his cart, and lifted in.
Miss Murdstone was good enough to take me out to the cart, and to say on
a single word did Peggotty speak. Releasing one of her arms, she put
nor that Captain in the Royal British Navy, had ever cried, that I



something else to eat, and had pointedly alluded to that description of

That Barkis is willing, I repeated, innocently. Is that all the
Peggotty. I have come here safe. Barkis is willing. My love to mama.
wondering what would ultimately become of my box, which Mr. Barkis had
in that name.
sit down, with my cap in my hand, on the corner of the chair nearest the

There was a gentleman here, yesterday, he said--a stout gentleman, by
I was very much shocked to hear of this melancholy accident, and said I

absent in his mind for some moments.
The waiter certainly got most. He entreated me more than once to come in

not cheering to my spirits, for it consisted of two dismal words, With
waiter. Never mind the ink. I lose by that.
heart. Therefore I gave him one of my three bright shillings, which he
years (qualities I am very sorry any children should prematurely change
in my hurry. My apprehensions were realized. When we stopped for supper
got up behind and swung there for a little way, I wondered whether their
they didnt like at all, because it woke them. Opposite me was an
they gradually one by one awoke. I recollect being very much surprised
Blue Boar; but I know it was the Blue Something, and that its likeness
be left till called for? said the guard. Come! IS there anybody?
More solitary than Robinson Crusoe, who had nobody to look at him
seven shillings were spent, I couldnt hope to remain there when I began
I stole a look at him. He was a gaunt, sallow young man, with hollow
I made him a bow and felt very much overawed. I was so ashamed to allude
six miles.
loaf of brown bread, which cost me threepence. Then, at a grocers shop,
we went into the little house of one of these poor old women, who was
mistake.
her warm, and watching it in a most distrustful manner. The completion

feathers displayed over the mantelpiece--I remember wondering when I
for a moment. I was in the middle state between sleeping and waking,


unfurnished appearance. All about it was so very quiet, that I said to
pasteboard and wire, looking in all the corners with their red eyes

Thats to be taken care of, sir; that bites.
out from his lodge door in a stupendous voice, Hallo, you sir! You
was one boy--a certain J. Steerforth--who cut his name very deep and
Peggottys, or of travelling outside the stage-coach, or of dining again
of a long bare dining-room, full of deal tables, and smelling of fat.
on Yarmouth flats, and feeling very sad and solitary. I picture myself
grind his teeth, and pull his hair in an unaccountable manner. But he
of two or three young women, who had rarely shown themselves before, and
which so abashed me, when I was ushered into it, that I hardly saw
the two sides interlaced on his forehead. But the circumstance about
Come here, sir! said Mr. Creakle, beckoning to me.
interpreter to the boys.
the wooden leg.
I was very glad to be ordered away, for Mrs. and Miss Creakle were both
frighten me, I dont know, but he made a burst out of his chair, before

like wild Indians, and the greater part could not resist the temptation
me when he had disposed of my affair in these terms. I told him seven
No, thank you, sir, I repeated.
Steerforth. I say, young Copperfield, youre going it!
There you are, young Copperfield, and a royal spread youve got.
shadow, except when Steerforth dipped a match into a phosphorus-box,
(J. Steerforth said) than the lowest boy in the school; that he had
Tungays friend, and who, assisting in the school, had once held some
that was always on the mantelpiece. We sat in the dark for some time,
the pudding an imposition. I heard that Miss Creakle was regarded by the
Good night, young Copperfield, said Steerforth. Ill take care of
I recollect, to look at him where he lay in the moonlight, with his
stood in the doorway looking round upon us like a giant in a story-book
When this dreadful exordium was over, and Tungay had stumped out again,
am really afraid to recollect, lest I should seem to exaggerate.
mischief.
ciphering-book; and now he throws his eye sideways down our lane, and we
behind me and wakes me to plainer perception of him, with a red ridge
German sausages, or roly-poly puddings, he was the merriest and most
and the Beadle thought it was Traddles, and took him out. I see him now,
Steerforth, in white trousers, carried her parasol for her, I felt proud
it was soon taken off, and I saw it no more.

qualities went a long way.

purpose he had mentioned. Accordingly, it was locked up in his box, and
laugh, and with tears in my eyes--was a sort of chorus, in general;
attracted a good deal of notice to me though I was the youngest there,
Steerforth treated him with systematic disparagement, and seldom lost
One day when Mr. Creakle kept the house from indisposition, which
get his wig curled; so Mr. Mell, who always did the drudgery, whatever
Silence! cried Mr. Mell, suddenly rising up, and striking his desk
Silence yourself, said Steerforth, turning red. Whom are you talking
I have not observed you, within a few minutes, urging your juniors on to
never gave you the least offence, and the many reasons for not insulting
into stone, and found Mr. Creakle in the midst of us, with Tungay at his

length.
you, Mr. Whats-your-name; and here Mr. Creakle folded his arms, cane



He is right, sir, without correction, returned Mr. Mell, in the midst
I apprehend, if you come to that, said Mr. Creakle, with his veins

one another. For myself, I felt so much self-reproach and contrition for

and exalted Steerforth to the skies: especially when he told us, as he
understanding what learned distinction was meant by this, I respected
had, according to custom, stood up on the announcement being made, and
pocket-handkerchief and wiped my eyes.
Aint he growed! said Mr. Peggotty.
lobsters, and an enormous crab, and a large canvas bag of shrimps, out
Yarmouth lugs to Gravesen. My sister she wrote to me the name of this
Peggotty. Ask HIM. He meant Ham, who beamed with delight and assent
chest heaves with pleasure. His strong loose hands clench themselves,
afterwards--!
a natural weakness to yield, and which not many persons could withstand.

The best of men can do no more, Mr. Peggotty, said Steerforth. He had
manner. I was almost tempted that evening to tell Steerforth about

towards us, and to grow and grow. How from counting months, we came to

received me exactly as if not five minutes had elapsed since we were

end, Mr. Barkis?

Peggotty.
This extremely artful suggestion Mr. Barkis accompanied with a nudge
wrung their many hands in the bleak wintry air, and shreds of the old
brim-full; like a friend come back from a long absence.
heart! I should have been more fit for Heaven than I ever have been

Peggotty only laughed the more, and held her apron tight over her face
Tell him so, retorted Peggotty, looking out of her apron. He has
fluttered. At last she said, putting out her hand, and laying it

found fault with, than I shall go to my Davy, and ask him to take me
master Mr. Creakle was, and they pitied me very much. I told them what a

Well, but I really do wonder, maam, said Peggotty.
Well then, dont talk about such uncomfortable things, theres a good
Why should she be inclined to forgive him now? said my mother, rather
are as jealous of Miss Murdstone as it is possible for a ridiculous
too--a--a--
pantries and I dont know where, that cant be very agreeable--and do
dont believe you really do, in your heart, Peggotty), you must be as

the good creature originated it, and took her part in it, merely that
It was almost ten oclock before we heard the sound of wheels. We all
He was standing before the fire with his back to it, while Miss
instead of her fingers. How long are the holidays?
It was on this very first day that I had the misfortune to throw her,
She was limp with horror; but stiffened herself to make a dart at me,
I saw Miss Murdstone lay her beads down.
My dear Jane, remonstrated my mother.
the room where they were, and they were talking together and my mother
There I was comfortable, and not afraid of being myself. But neither of
all tempers, the worst.
very vigorous--
when we--not very decently--interrupted him.
I was sorry, David, I remarked, said Mr. Murdstone, turning his head
I will have it done.
Clara, addressing my mother in a lower voice, from old associations

monstrous load that I was obliged to bear, a daymare that there was
in at one ear and out at the other! What yawns and dozes I lapsed into,
bent over me, to bid me farewell.
presence near my bed--looking at me with the same intent face--holding
and to exist alone.
playground, when Mr. Sharp entered and said:
breakfast with the cane and a newspaper before him, and Mrs. Creakle
I looked at her earnestly.


If ever child were stricken with sincere grief, I was. But I remember
sheet of letter-paper full of skeletons; and that he gave me at parting,
Will you come with me, young sir, if you please, he said, opening the
comfortable, raised their heads to look at me, and then went on with
Thats right.
I hope so, my dear, said Mr. Omer. As I have got my breath now, I
how. Everything is like life, in my opinion, if you look at it in that
breakfast, for the black things destroyed my appetite, I have been
Do you know how my little brother is, sir? I inquired.
in a corner of the little room, which Minnie hastily cleared, lest I
Minnie coloured a little, and the other two girls smiled at one another.
me: would you like to see your--
shop to put that to rights, and wait for customers. Minnie stayed behind
remember it as a kind of half chaise-cart, half pianoforte-van, painted
upon them for their hardness of heart.
sat up at night still, and watched. As long as her poor dear pretty was
This was all the consolation that her firmness administered to me. I do
and fro in the room. I used to sit with folded hands watching him, and
turned the cover gently back, I cried: Oh no! oh no! and held her
his eye. Our little friends grow up around us. They grow out of our
There are Mr. Murdstone, our neighbour Mr. Grayper, Mr. Chillip, and
day say: Well done.

she would get better, but she was more delicate, and sunk a little every
truth, I know.
I never left her afterwards, said Peggotty. She often talked to them
It was pretty far in the night, said Peggotty, when she asked me for


months warning too. I mustered courage once, to ask Miss Murdstone when
his taking my education in hand again, or of Miss Murdstones

this moment, sitting by the fireside with Miss Murdstone; but if I was
the ways there are, and all the ways there aint, in short--to get a
long as you are here, my pet, I shall come over every week of my life to
again surrounded by those honest faces, shining welcome on me; of


stuffed figure. But when she began to look about her, and to speak to
and said:
Peggotty calling his attention to my sufferings, Mr. Barkis gave me a
almost choked her. But as we drew nearer to the end of our journey, he
I looked up into his face, and answered, with an attempt to be very

of her relations going on before, the good soul was obliged to stop and
of, this month back! Yes, my precious; and I think I should be more
Look at me, Peggotty, I replied; and see if I am not really glad, and
little in my eyes; and Mrs. Gummidge was waiting at the door as if she
Mrs. Gummidge moaned.
a place as ever; and yet it did not impress me in the same way. I felt
to run after her, and she ran so fast that we were very near the cottage
Mr. Peggottys inquiring why, rumpled her hair all over her face to hide
and had such a pleasant manner of being both sly and shy at once, that



Mr. Peggotty gave his head another toss, as much as to say: Of course
I was running on, very fast indeed, when my eyes rested on little

those old wanderings, even if it had been otherwise. Wild and full of
tied up in a handkerchief. As he made no allusion of any kind to this
who was opposite. One night, being, as I suppose, inspired by love, he
At length, when the term of my visit was nearly expired, it was given


propose that as I was going away so very soon now, we should determine
Mr. Barkis turned to me, and said, with a wink,--by the by, I should
In a word, they were married, and had gone into the church for no other
the contemplation of his happiness. If so, it sharpened his appetite;


house, the protector of Emly and Mrs. Gummidge, and only wished that
not recollect one word, I immediately discovered and immediately applied
my head, said Peggotty, you shall find it as if I expected you here
And now I fell into a state of neglect, which I cannot look back upon
that was done to me had no intervals of relenting, and was done in a
connecting in my own thoughts with a pale tortoise-shell cat), it was
and trousers. In this coffer, his riches hid themselves with such a

coming to my remembrance too, I knew him to be Mr. Quinion, whom I
with a frown, as it turned, in its aversion, elsewhere.
Murdstone leaning against the wicket of the churchyard, and Mr. Quinion
young this is a world for action, and not for moping and droning in. It
What is before you, is a fight with the world; and the sooner you begin
cellars, or the wharf, or something about it.
He having, Mr. Quinion observed in a low voice, and half turning
your own account.
the legs in that fight with the world which was now to come off. Behold
being much surprised by anything; but it is matter of some surprise to
a hundred years, I dare say; its decaying floors and staircase; the
pasted on full ones, or corks to be fitted to them, or seals to be put
that this youth had not been christened by that name, but that it had
fancy and my emulation up by, would pass away from me, little by little,
hung outside his coat,--for ornament, I afterwards found, as he very
letter from Mr. Murdstone, in which he mentions that he would desire

take that trouble.
inclined to believe, from my uncertainty on this head, that it was six
Arrived at this house in Windsor Terrace (which I noticed was shabby
establishment. My room was at the top of the house, at the back: a close
should have hardly understood what the word meant, in the sense in which

were creditors. THEY used to come at all hours, and some of them were
gentility than ever. Mrs. Micawber was quite as elastic. I have known
came back at night. This made a hole in the six or seven shillings, I
Church--at the back of the church,--which is now removed altogether.
and ordering a small plate of that delicacy to eat with it. What the
wonder what they thought of me!
The landlord looked at me in return over the bar, from head to foot,

suffered in secret, and that I suffered exquisitely, no one ever knew
rebelled against my being so distinguished; but Mick Walker settled him
to walk home with six or seven shillings in my pocket, looking into the
respective circumstances, sprung up between me and these people,
With the exception of the heel of a Dutch cheese--which is not adapted

mind, would take painful liberties if so much confidence was reposed in
early, I had audience of him in a turn-up bedstead, with a cut in his
relish in these meals which I well remember.
Random was in a debtors prison, there was a man there with nothing
another debtor, who shared the room with Mr. Micawber, came in from the
dirty lady was not married to Captain Hopkins. My timid station on his
parlours of the emptied house in Windsor Terrace; Mrs. Micawber, the

morning, admitting of my going in; but I know that I was often up at six
deal, and which I suppose, now, to have been some former composition
mind that Mr. Micawber, about this time, composed a petition to the
profit to him) set to work at the petition, invented it, engrossed it
in a long file: several waiting outside, while one entered, affixed his
lounged about at meal-times in obscure streets, the stones of which

Micawber, in a little more flip, for we had been having some already,
question in which I had a near interest, I said to Mrs. Micawber:
that, with a little interest, something might be done for a man of his

liabilities both, she went on, looking at the wall; but I never will
waistcoat full of the heads and tails of shrimps, of which he had been
Mr. Micawber was so deeply affected by this proof of her devotion (as
been a dreadful day! We stand alone now--everything is gone from us!
Mrs. Micawber and their family were going away from London, and that a

afternoon, to tell Mr. Quinion that he must relinquish me on the day
We had a very pleasant day, though we were all in a tender state about
were going to lose one another.
what you can do today. Procrastination is the thief of time. Collar

office, and saw them, with a desolate heart, take their places outside,
children, and I stood in the road looking wistfully at them, a mist
my aunt, Miss Betsey. I have already observed that I dont know how this
felt her touch her pretty hair with no ungentle hand; and though it
afterwards what I had wanted it for.
present myself in the counting-house at the usual hour, to receive my
I looked about me for someone who would help me to carry it to the
Wot box? said the long-legged young man.
landlords family should fathom what I was doing, and detain me; so
Wot! said the young man, seizing me by my jacket collar, with a
into the cart, sat upon my box, and, exclaiming that he would drive to
night when my arrival gave her so much umbrage.

the best price was given for rags, bones, and kitchen-stuff. The master
waistcoat, stood his pipe on its head, against the door-post, went into
family, he said, if I was to offer ninepence for it.
very urgent sense of my difficulties when I once again set off with my
within. Never shall I forget the lonely sensation of first lying down,
Steerforth was there, I would have lurked about until he came out
porch, or stood beneath the yew-tree, with his hand to his forehead,
I had, and was even more afraid of the vicious looks of the trampers I
strength for getting to my journeys end, I resolved to make the sale
dirty lane, ending in an enclosure full of stinging-nettles, against the
the den he had come from, where another little window showed a prospect

Oh, my lungs and liver, cried the old man, no! Oh, my eyes, no! Oh,
so frightened in my life, before or since; but I told him humbly that
and lets have some! This, and many offers to lend him a knife for
with a cocked hat, at another with a flute. But I resisted all these

and orchards. It was sufficiently late in the year for the orchards



The woman burst into a fit of laughter, as if she thought this a joke,
often, that I was very seriously delayed. But under this difficulty, as
and to leave me helpless and dispirited.
London.
Pretty stiff in the back? said he, making himself upright.
I accepted the gift thankfully, and bought a loaf with it. Dispatching

thats all I have got to say. With which words she hurried into the
frightened the birds from my aunts garden, as I stood at the gate. My
discomposed by this unexpected behaviour, that I was on the point of
in and stood beside her, touching her with my finger.
I am David Copperfield, of Blunderstone, in Suffolk--where you came,
out several bottles, and pour some of the contents of each into my
Janet looked a little surprised to see me lying stiffly on the sofa (I

Oh! you think she wouldnt have run away? said Mr. Dick.
head. Oh! do with him?

at her throat not unlike a shirt-collar, and things at her wrists like
Janet was a pretty blooming girl, of about nineteen or twenty, and a
guarding all sorts of bottles and pots, and, wonderfully out of keeping
To this hour I dont know whether my aunt had any lawful right of way
I saw my aunt engage, single-handed, with a sandy-headed lad of fifteen,
great shawls. What sort of bundle I looked like, I dont know, but I
at table, not unlike a trussed bird myself, and moving my arms with

I should like to know! She had had one husband. She had seen David
That little man of a doctor, with his head on one side, said my aunt,

dying head upon her arm, on whose face my mother had imprinted her last
was thrown into by the struggle outside, put an end to all softer ideas
Davids son? said Mr. Dick, with an attentive, puzzled face.
in some sort like a prisoner; my aunt going in front and Janet bringing
looking at the moonlight on the water, as if I could hope to read my
CHAPTER 14. MY AUNT MAKES UP HER MIND ABOUT ME
being on the other side of the small round table. When she had finished

I dont know, said my aunt. We shall see.
to be one microscopic speck left on the carpet; next dusted and arranged
needle in threading it, you think Mr. Dick a short name, eh?
it, to have a mortal antipathy for it, Heaven knows. Mr. Dick is his

Yes, sir, I answered; for a short time.

I made it. Well go and fly it, you and I, said Mr. Dick. Do you see
having a good-humoured jest with me. So I laughed, and he laughed, and



of him, and shall not ill-treat him as some people (besides the
fever. That was before he came to me, but the recollection of it is
way. I am aware of that; and thats the reason why I insist upon it,


extreme; but I made an endeavour to suppress it, and to be as agreeable
no other token of her preparing herself to receive the visitor so much
looked about her, that I really believe she was motionless, and unable
among them the young malefactor who was the donkeys guardian, and who
little ruffled by the combat, marched past them into the house, with


a better and happier thing for my brother if he had never entered into

disgraceful.

common vagabond about the country; and comes here, in rags, to appeal
I believe, said Mr. Murdstone, with an inclination of his head,

at that time?
to propitiate, induces me to think it possible. Now I must caution you
Well, maam, have YOU got anything to remark?
had been more miserable than I thought anybody could believe, who only
you say he is, at least I can do as much for him then, as you have done.
day it was for the soft little creature when you first came in her
I never heard anything like this person in my life! exclaimed Miss
continued to address herself to Mr. Murdstone as if there had been no
her--and why, in the mysterious dispensations of Providence, you ever

No attempt at defiance being made, however, her face gradually relaxed,


I have written, and there I leave it.
to keep him out, and the certainty with which he came in, and tumbled
air, that it lifted his mind out of its confusion, and bore it (such was
Trot, said my aunt one evening, when the backgammon-board was placed

giving me all the money he had in his possession, gold and silver too,
Very happy indeed, thank you, aunt, I said.
none, and we conversed on other subjects until we came to Canterbury,
carved garlands of fruit and flowers, twinkled like a star; the two
looking much older--whose hair was cropped as close as the closest
parlour looking towards the street, from the window of which I caught a



question, you know. Whats your motive in this?
school? Whatever the motive, you want the best?
Our little friend here might have some motive, perhaps, for objecting
see me; but looking that way more attentively, it made me uncomfortable
Its very unfortunate, said my aunt. I dont know what to do, Trot.
he can easily go to the right-about. There will be time to find some
Then come and see my little housekeeper, said Mr. Wickfield.

pleasant face; and when he had concluded, proposed to my aunt that we
to arrive at home with the grey pony before dark; and as I apprehend Mr.


his eyes rested on her, and he fell into a brooding state, and was
the office; and feeling friendly towards everybody, went in and spoke
Next morning, after breakfast, I entered on school life again. I went,
the hearth-rug. Turning upon me a lustreless eye, that reminded me of

still, for busy hands to do. The busy people achieve their full share
for a cousin, and an old playfellow, of Annies.
No? with astonishment.
was a simplicity in it, and indeed in his whole manner, when the
of silence and retirement. About five-and-twenty boys were studiously
so conscious of having passed through scenes of which they could have
anything about me which would reveal my proceedings in connexion with
But there was such an influence in Mr. Wickfields old house, that when



As he held the door open with his hand, Uriah looked at me, and looked
Doctor; its all the same, you know.
gift-horse in the mouth, which is not a gracious thing to do; otherwise,
Strong, I mean--is not quite a charming young boy, said Mr. Jack

the same corner, and Mr. Wickfield sat down to drink, and drank a good
The time having come for her withdrawal for the night, and she having

leave my darling, or that my darling may die and leave me, comes like a

not tired, went down too, with a book in my hand, to avail myself, for
conveniently, I observed that he had not such a thing as a smile about
pointed, with sharp dints in them, had a singular and most uncomfortable
modestly; let the other be where he may. My mother is likewise a very
had left off. Since a year after my fathers death. How much have I
much too umble for that!



think you would, certainly! over and over again. Being, at last, ready
next day, and a good deal the better next day, and so shook it off by
of those qualities unless they proved themselves unworthy of it, which
our fellows said) ready to swarm the Doctor out of house and home. Also,
he was the kindest of men; with a simple faith in him that might have
away. In fact, there was a story current among us (I have no idea, and
had a fatherly, benignant way of showing his fondness for her, which
whom she seemed to be afraid), that never wore off. When she came there
is, that it always made its appearance of an evening, wheresoever Mrs.
now, in the evening, Mr. Wickfield, Agnes, and I, went to have tea with
I thank you, maam, replied the Doctor.

her fan on his coat-sleeve, said:
proposing for Annie. Not that there was anything so very much out of
was perfectly true--and I hardly know if I have a heart at all. Then,
the ground too. She now said very softly, in a trembling voice:
was a family circumstance she might mention to you--indeed, I think, was
Shall I?
dont know how many years. I recollect it was settled by general
The good Doctor said she was nervous, and, to relieve her, proposed a
the cards; but the Doctor was quite happy in her attention, and took no
it is past your cousin Jacks time, and we must not detain him, since
and fast with all of us. Some of us can hardly expect, perhaps, in the
tremendous broadside of cheers discharged by our boys, who had assembled
all pressing out of the room, in a crowd, to see what was the matter, we
her mother; but she said, it seemed, that she was better than she had
burning red, when she answered that she had had it safe, a little while
and dark. But a door of communication between that and the Doctors
again before my older judgement. Penitence, humiliation, shame, pride,
the same face, something quieted, as he resumed his reading.
condition and prospects. I never could have derived anything like the

to be let or sold. God knows I had no part in it while they remained
me. Mr. Peggotty was well, and Ham was well, and Mrs. Gummidge was but

all his disbursements. As he had no idea of deceiving her, and always
observe the effect which this description of her made upon me.

Walking about? I inquired.
To be sure he has, retorted Mr. Dick, nodding his head gravely. Never
beggar, no beggar, no beggar, sir! went on to say, that from his window
herself, might have been induced to pay a price for his peace and quiet.
I seen him mounted on a little knoll, cheering the whole field on
could be done by hands.
into the school and wait. He always sat in a particular corner, on a
reading to himself. However, it passed into a custom too; and Mr. Dick,
Agnes was one of Mr. Dicks friends, very soon; and in often coming


reading is hardly to be called study. I have passed an hour or two in

when he delivered himself of these sentiments: shaking his head all the
had their natural affections, which they hoped would give no offence to
mourning.
My Uriah, said Mrs. Heep, has looked forward to this, sir, a long
and felt that they were very attentive. Presently they began to talk
had its effect upon me, as a touch of nature; but the skill with which
anything but sometimes encourage them a little, for fear they should be

Thank you, said Mr. Micawber, waving his hand as of old, and settling
I have discovered my friend Copperfield, said Mr. Micawber genteelly,
We are too umble, sir, said Mrs. Heep, my son and me, to be the
his knowledge of men and things, it would require, still it is a rich
pressure of pecuniary difficulties. I knew he was certain to say
most fashionable manner, making a good deal of noise on the pavement
I noticed, by the by, that although Mr. Micawber was just as much

expected, being so newly released from captivity. In fact, said Mrs.
what could a man of Mr. Micawbers spirit do? But one obvious course
The opinion of those other branches of my family, pursued Mrs.

cut off from my home (I allude to lodgings in Pentonville), from my boy
When I took my leave of them, they both pressed me so much to come and
I was still more surprised, when I went to the little hotel next day at
I was afraid of hurting Mr. Micawbers feelings, or, at all events, Mrs.
He proposed me afterwards; and he, and Mrs. Micawber, and I, took a
were really affected.
discharged the pecuniary liability contracted at this establishment,

enjoyment, smiling at Mrs. Micawbers conversation, eating walnuts out
as I look back upon that flowing water, now a dry channel overgrown with
been mastered by the wonderful Being, at whose place she thinks I, even
Oh, Miss Shepherd! in a transport of love.
the cloak-room. Ecstasy! What are my agony and indignation next day,

rough red cheeks, an ill-conditioned mind, and an injurious tongue.
I am, or where anybody is. I hardly know which is myself and which the
shade over my eyes; and I should be very dull, but that Agnes is a
same as if he had never joined it.
better angel of the lives of all who come within her calm, good,

clothes, and having my boots cleaned over and over again. I seem, then,
three occasions, in a sickly, spoony manner, round and round the house
shoulder, and saying, Oh, Mr. Copperfield, can I believe my ears! I
neednt do, as I have not come there to be insulted.
The time arrives. It is a waltz, I think, Miss Larkins doubtfully

Oh! here is my bold friend! Mr. Chestle wants to know you, Mr.
divinity. For some days afterwards, I am lost in rapturous reflections;
No; to no Captain. To Mr. Chestle, a hop-grower.
CHAPTER 19. I LOOK ABOUT ME, AND MAKE A DISCOVERY
me, that other separations have. I try in vain to recall how I felt
such miraculous provision, my desire was to apply myself to some pursuit
help it, I think we had better take a little breathing-time. In the

said my aunt, looking at me approvingly, or shed have been so vain
And hes like David, too, said my aunt, decisively.
That you may begin, in a small way, to have a reliance upon yourself,

the house had not been like itself since I had left it.

Agnes laughed again, and shook her head.


becomes jaded and haggard. Do not be alarmed by what I say, Agnes, but


suggested to his thoughts.
walking about, arm-in-arm, the livelong day.
out!
than say anything calculated to overturn the Doctors plans.
sooner than hell overturn the Doctors plans.
other deserving members of her family, whom it was desirable to set on
of returning home for a time, as the only hope of restoration. Thats

the letter, it would be insupportable to me to think of.
to dislike the intimacy between her and Agnes, and to watch it with
cancelled, and I were still standing in the doorway on the night of the
remained shut up in themselves a hundred years together, and of the trim
I got away from Agnes and her father, somehow, with an indifferent show


Heres a genlmn behind me, Ill pound it, said William, as has bred
Bred them Suffolk Punches by wholesale?

coach. It was in vain to take refuge in gruffness of speech. I spoke
money. When we came, at last, within a stage of London, and passed the
like for dinner? Young gentlemen likes poultry in general: have a fowl!
I commanded him, in my deepest voice, to order a veal cutlet and
thought it flat; and it certainly had more English crumbs in it, than
came out into the rainy street, at twelve oclock at night, I felt as if
life moving along--that I dont know when the figure of a handsome
lost him. But, in the then condition of my mind, where the play was
I grasped him by both hands, and could not let them go. But for very
Why, how do you come to be here? said Steerforth, clapping me on the
and said gaily:
than you are. I have been at Covent Garden, too, and there never was a

upstairs, where we parted with friendly heartiness at his door, and
me that my shaving-water was outside, I felt severely the having no
the fire burnt bright, and a fine hot breakfast was set forth on a table
he had still this interest in me, I told him how my aunt had proposed



a handsome face, was in the doorway as we alighted; and greeting
looks too, who attracted my attention: perhaps because I had not
She was introduced as Miss Dartle, and both Steerforth and his mother
though?--I want to be put right, if I am wrong--isnt it, really?

Steerforth would only go there with me; and explaining to him that I was
a journey with you, Daisy), to see that sort of people together, and to
Why, theres a pretty wide separation between them and us, said

Steerforths face fell, and he paused a moment.
thousand pounds of her own, and saves the interest of it every year, to
susceptible part of her face, and that, when she turned pale, that mark
have been very glad to hear them too, if he had not interposed, and


emotions; but I cannot be indifferent to anyone who is so sensible of
seriously think of going down into the country with me. There was no
She went to bed soon after this, and Mrs. Steerforth retired too.
when I found a likeness of Miss Dartle looking eagerly at me from above
or not--without knowing what I meant.
to it at the sides, a soft way of speaking, with a peculiar habit of
other he possessed, he only seemed to be the more respectable. Even the
of respectability, unaffected by the east wind of January, and not
Thank you, sir, Mr. Steerforth is tolerably well. Another of his
never any less: and yet, invariably, however far I might have been
I felt myself the greenest and most inexperienced of mortals.
all, it was a familiar, unrestrained, affectionate demeanour that he
saw was Littimers unruffled eye; fraught, as I fancied, with the silent
out of the chimney; and had had a great mind, he told me, to walk in and
Oh, of course! Its no fun, said Steerforth, unless we take them by
I answered, laughing, that I thought we might get through it in that

if it had never left off.
shake hands with me, Mr. Omer, if you please, said I, putting out my

gets short, but it seldom gets longer as a man gets older. I take it as
dancing on the counter.

My dear, said Mr. Omer, I dont say its the case with you, winking
eluded all his attempts to recover it with that obstinacy, that I fully

lady company, they didnt very well agree, and she didnt stop. At last
inquiry if I might peep in, was answered with a free permission; and,
in and speak to her, sir! Make yourself at home!
her.
the--what is it?--the Rookery, said I.
life, I dare say--not even to her--more freely than I did that morning.
his nightcap, which I did most cordially. When I sat down by the side

am, finds that out in his mind when hes laid up. Im a very poor man,
Old clothes, said Mr. Barkis.
that anyone can give to C. P. Barkis, she deserves, and more! My dear,
producing a single coin from his store; and that he endured unheard-of
personal benefactor of hers, and a kind friend to me, and that she would
impossibility of doing anything else, or doing anything better, which
But to bring you so far, I returned, and to separate, seems bad
worthless to him, and next minute thrown away--I say, if anyone had told
And its the same I saw this morning, he returned. I came straight to
of bashfulness that sat upon him very well, held little Emly by
Masr Davy! Its Masr Davy!
you, along with Masr Davy, on the brightest night of your uncles life
bor--gentlmen growed--so th are!
Steerforth only nodded; but with such a pleased expression of interest,
I quite understand, said Steerforth.
a young gal, when a woman. Not much of a person to look at, he warnt,
a honest man as had a right to defend her. I dont know how long I may
much. Oh, Uncle! I never can have him. Hes such a good fellow! I gives
All of a sudden, one evening--as it might be tonight--comes little


minutes we were all as easy and as happy as it was possible to be.
embarrass her; how he talked to Mr. Peggotty of boats, and ships, and
(Steerforth too), in irresistible sympathy with what was so pleasant and
across the fire to me, of our old wanderings upon the beach, to pick up
stood crowded round the door to light us as far as they could upon our
Steerforth.
in earnest, and are good. I wish we all were! Next moment he was
he was free: for, knowing how assiduously she attended on Mr. Barkis
naturally no great interest in going there again. Hence, on three or
Peggottys own faithful care had ever since kept neat, and made a garden
lunatic gentleman, and the people who took care of him. He was always
linger about my native place, until the reddening winter sun admonished
a hundred yards out of my track, I always looked in as I went by.
He gave such a start when I put my hand upon his shoulder, that he made
with a piece of burning wood, striking out of it a train of red-hot
My dear Steerforth, what is the matter?
observe him in silence, as he stood leaning his head upon his hand, and

feast with most admired disorder, Daisy.

As long as the novelty should last, said I, laughing.
amazes me most in you, Steerforth--that you should be contented with
all events, walking me briskly on, I have bought a boat that was for



ingenuity in that handicraft, until he had become a skilled workman. He


Its gone! he returned, looking over his shoulder. And all ill go

I met her in the street this afternoon, and she wished to know if she
subject. I remained, therefore, in a state of considerable expectation
Her chin, which was what is called a double chin, was so fat that it
do so far away from home? Up to mischief, Ill be bound. Oh, youre a
each of her little knees, and glancing shrewdly at me, Im of too full
obliged to ring the bell. Ha! ha! ha! Hes a pleasant wretch, but he
It was Walker, my sweet pet, replied Miss Mowcher, and he came of a
she tumbled in a heap upon the chair. From this employment she suddenly

turned topsy-turvy, I call him, for his names got all the letters in

the men call it when they make speeches in Parliament) is a system of
and begging the assistance of my hand, mounted up, pretty nimbly, to the
his laughing face towards me, and submitted his head to her inspection,
busiest manner I ever witnessed, talking all the time.
perfumers shop, and wants to buy a bottle of the Madagascar Liquid.
I thought it might be. Now that, my child, continued Miss Mowcher,
such a face, that theyd as soon think of laying it on, before a whole

were confident of its appearing presently.

to guess at. She is at present apprenticed, Miss Mowcher, or articled,
as if she were still looking for that answer. When he ceased she became


she held up before one eye to enforce her persuasions, said we would
and replacing in the bag a miscellaneous collection of little objects
this offer, and, with her finger on her nose, departed.
questions after two or three attempts, I forbore or forgot to repeat
shes talking to some un in here.
hold any that the folk shrink away from, more.
I recollect her now! cried I, recalling one of the two girls I had

And if I could deny her when the tears was on her face, Masr Davy,


herself.
retired near me, and showed it to him.
turned back; but no word passed her lips. Making the same low, dreary,
No! no! no! cried little Emly, sobbing, and shaking her head. I am
much worthier than me, who was all bound up in you, and never vain and
for the sake of old times, do, please, try to help me! I want to be a
smile, and then to laugh, and then to sit up, half ashamed; while


and left a great many people very sorry behind US.
mystery as any pyramid in Egypt.

its flatness.

Nonsense, Steerforth! I exclaimed. You dont mean to say that there
else, change and change about; but its always a very pleasant,
I made allowance for Steerforths light way of treating the subject,
taken lodgings for a week at a kind of private hotel at Lincolns Inn
and said, pretending to laugh, that if my poor mother had been alive,
donkeys off. I am confident he wants strength of purpose. I ought to

hope the steak may be beef, but I dont believe it. Nothings genuine in
according to certain established regulations from which no deviation,
Come! said my aunt. Thats cheering!
great deal on my education, and have always been as liberal to me in all
your being a good, a sensible, and a happy man. I am bent upon it--so is
confused--no, I have no other claim upon my means--and you are my
We had a long chat by the fire before we went to bed. I slept in a room
catch them at it, at twelve oclock--and then went on towards Ludgate


What Mr. Dick had told me, and what I had supposed to be a delusion of
guineas were gone, and only the loose silver remained.
As we were left to look about us while Mr. Spenlow was fetched, I
my eyes with increasing complacency over these and many similar objects,

something more about it. That although it was little else than a matter
Mr. Jorkinss opinions. Mr. Jorkins thinks a thousand pounds too little,

pleased, and that my aunt need neither remain in town nor return at
from the rest; and there, on the two sides of a raised platform of the
man secretly eating crumbs out of his coat pockets, was warming itself
of the clerks poking one another with their pens to point me out.
advertisement, carefully cut out of a newspaper, setting forth that in
communicate with Mrs. Crupp. It was not until we had rung three or four
So we went upstairs.


the day after tomorrow, and Mrs. Crupp said, thank Heaven she had now
that when the coach was gone, I turned my face to the Adelphi, pondering
It was a wonderfully fine thing to let myself in and out, and to come

was full of hints and mysterious questions, but took a great interest
My dear Steerforth, cried I, I began to think I should never see you
But you shall have some breakfast! said I, with my hand on the

would be five shillings, and what I pleased. I said, certainly we would
declined, and said, Never mind fish. But Mrs. Crupp said, Dont say
fifteen people. This preparation, Mrs. Crupp, after some difficulty,
indefinitely, as a man, and seldom or never in the first person
preside, I made Steerforth take the head of the table when dinner was
deal of destruction.
further notice; and madly took so much snuff out of Graingers box, that
Steerforth--youretheguidingstarofmyexistence.

looking-glass. That was I too. I was very pale in the looking-glass;
Copperfield. I was angry at that false report, until, finding myself on
were very high up in a very hot theatre, looking down into a large pit,
about me crying Silence! to somebody, and ladies casting indignant
Agnes! I said. Imafraidyourenorwell.
it. Go away now, Trotwood, for my sake, and ask your friends to take you
were a hard board; my tongue the bottom of an empty kettle, furred with
broth, dimpled all over with fat, and thought I was going the way of my
I was going out at my door on the morning after that deplorable day of
Copperfield, Esquire, and he believed it, and gave me the letter, which
thought, unless he thought I was learning to write. I must have written
If the day were half as tremendous to any other professional gentleman
She looked so quiet and good, and reminded me so strongly of my airy
Sit down, said Agnes, cheerfully. Dont be unhappy, Trotwood. If you
On warning you, said Agnes, with a steady glance, against your bad
From many things--trifles in themselves, but they do not seem to me to
in what it is engendered, Trotwood,--in how true a remembrance of our
mean, with a quiet smile, for I was going to interrupt her, and she
When I recall it, said Agnes.


promotion! I cried, indignantly. Have you made no remonstrance about
Forced upon him, Agnes! Who forces it upon him?
humility and gratitude--with truth, perhaps: I hope so--but his position
I did, Trotwood, she replied, what I hope was right. Feeling sure
I had never before seen Agnes cry. I had seen tears in her eyes when I
friendly to Uriah. Dont repel him. Dont resent (as I think you have a
considerably, and inquired, firstly, if I went much into the parks,
cowards of us both.
or which, remotely connected with the Treasury.

Traddles.
should be here at all: as Traddles was only invited this morning, when
his watch-chain, in a comfortable, prosperous sort of way. I should say
people down in the trenches.
repeatedly told us, that if she had a weakness, it was Blood.
sanguine complexion.

gave the utmost satisfaction, and brought the gentleman into great


discretion that had been observed. Mr. Spiker, after the receipt of such
interested to hear that I knew Steerforth, and spoke of him with such
and if I thought of her sweet face and placid smile, as though they had
Oh, really, Master Copperfield, he rejoined--I beg your pardon,
labour, when we got to my place.
Uriah, to see you waiting upon me is what I never could have expected!
was young then, and unused to disguise what I so strongly felt.
What a prophet you have shown yourself, Mister Copperfield! pursued

No, said I, drily.


out his cruel-looking hand above my table, and pressed his own thumb
it, as if he were shaving himself.


the fire, and running him through with it. It went from me with a shock,

particular favour. You wouldnt wish to make unpleasantness. I know
it would be quite convenient. So I shall have time gradually to make her
scattered.

thankful. Having lent him a night-cap, which he put on at once, and in

he would not stay to breakfast), it appeared to me as if the night was
like a small tent, on the edge of the back seat on the roof, while
own lips that she regarded herself as the innocent cause of his errors,

with me, because she had so large a share in my thoughts and interest.
given to record that circumstance in fragments of English versification.
Mr. Spenlow was as good as his word. In a week or two, he referred to
sherry there, of a quality so precious as to make a man wink. We had
time the great article of competition there was starch: which I think
I asked Mr. Spenlow what he considered the best sort of professional
the Consistory. You made a quiet little round game of it, among a family
solemnly, in conclusion; but when the price of wheat per bushel had been
is, I observe), I give up a subject for lost.

know what she was--anything that no one ever saw, and everything that
brother is robust, I am obliged to you.
Miss Murdstone has had the goodness, said Mr. Spenlow to me, to
in that state of love, was a little too ridiculous. I could only sit
share. When a most amiable person, with a highly polished bald head,
apprehension that Miss Murdstone would disparage me to her. The amiable


well on all accounts that they should not. As the chances of life have
her neck; which seemed to be the same set, in exactly the same state,

yet mindful of me, seemed to me the summit of human ambition--I am
melodious manner.) On a Sunday morning, when I dont practise, I must

Traces of deep-seated anguish appeared in my countenance. That she
dimpled chin upon his head!--and we walked away to look at a greenhouse.
He only winked lazily, when she kissed his ball of a head.
well make ourselves as happy as we can in spite of her, and well tease
and a quantity of curls, and a little black dog being held up, in two

at the breakfast-table to make the tea again, however; and I had the
I dont mean the dreams that I dreamed on that day alone, but day after


have no suspicion of its being devoted to any improper use) she began to
encouragement. Never say die, sir! If She dont smile upon you,
and fortify herself against returning pain with sips of her medicine. At
the young gentleman has his original character formed. But let him go to
intrude where I were not welcome. But you are a young gentleman, Mr.


who was learning to make houses, and had not yet got out of his cramped
passage--because that there little bill has been running so long, that

the youthful servant replied Yes.
sofa-bedstead in it, and his blacking-brushes and blacking were among

His old simple character and good temper, and something of his old
payment of that hundred pounds was a great pull. A great pull! said

Of course I was! said Traddles. The one I was always going to write
what he expected, and so he married his housekeeper.
one side. Do you recollect him?
(glancing at his table), I am at work for him at this minute. I am not
get connected with some newspaper: which would almost be the making of
present itself to me until afterwards; for my selfish thoughts were
However, he said, its not that we havent made a beginning towards
its something. The table-cloths, and pillow-cases, and articles of

I beg your pardon, Mr. Traddles, said Mr. Micawber, with the old roll

while Traddles looked (with reason) not a little amazed at this
Micawber, in the immediate neighbourhood of the Cathedral.
before making what I trust I shall not be accused of presumption in
to this announcement, for Mrs. Micawber, being in a delicate state of
to forego it.
which gleams--if I may be allowed the expression--which gleams--in your
pledges of affection which--in short, to the infantine group. Mrs.
condition, my appetite languished; and I was glad of it, for I felt
fish and joint, and said, with a dignified sense of injury, No! No,
sink breathless on a chair near the door, lay her hand upon her nankeen
withdraw to the landing-place, beyond the outer door; where a habit of
carrying the parcel, and supporting Mrs. Micawber on his arm. They were
desire to answer for others. I am too well aware that when, in the
Mr. Micawber then embraced Mrs. Micawber, and pressed my hand; leaving
or the lavender-water, or the pins, or the fire, or the wax-candles, but
banquet was such a failure that I should have been quite unhappy--about

of it, the frequent starting up to look after it, the frequent sitting
staid Littimer, standing hat in hand before me.
Did he tell you you would find him here?
if he had stabbed himself. Mrs. Micawber put on her brown gloves, and
elbows, when he had his back towards me, seemed to teem with the
I should imagine that he might be here tomorrow, sir. I rather thought

Mr. Steerforth has not seen it yet, I suppose?
Mr. Micawber roused me from this reflection, which was blended with
Copperfield and myself were younger, and fought our way in the world


argumentatively, being equally out of the question, Mr. Copperfield,
I know from my own knowledge of him, is calculated to shine; and the
or receive the offer of them with contumely, what is the use of dwelling

Very well, said Mrs. Micawber. Then what do I recommend? Here is Mr.
forcibly, that what Mr. Micawber has to do, is to throw down the
making his shirt-collar meet in front of his chin, and glancing at me
Traddles, too, who was looking at the fire.
Copperfield, to do the same; to regard it as an investment which is sure
when Mr. Micawber should exert himself and--I will add--assert himself,


he observed, could deprive him of the impression that his friend
which he had always had his eye, but which he did not expect to attain
Mrs. Micawber, tapping at the wall again to know if tea were ready,
that woman or perish in the attempt.
anything to lend.
of that one. I have been thinking that he will most likely propose that
laughing, on the character of Mr. Micawber and the old relations between

How are you, my Bacchanal?

could give him anything to eat? During most of this short dialogue, when
understood him that you were at Oxford; though, now I think of it, he

Yes! still feeling in his pockets, and looking over their contents:
to manage for his own comfort. It said nothing of her weariness

to me--



equivalent to winding up his affairs.
belonging to the undersigned, as yearly tenant of this habitation, but
After premising thus much, it would be a work of supererogation to add,
or any age that could be mentioned.


look upon me with a more intent expression still. Blameless as I was,
profession really so engaging and interesting as to absorb your whole

want to found an opinion on what you tell me. Then, its not so? Well! I
lip, and deep into the nether lip, and slanted down the face. There was

Mrs. Steerforth was particularly happy in her sons society, and
Oh, but do tell me, though, somebody, because I have been thinking
It has become a second nature, said Mrs. Steerforth, without any
You cannot learn frankness, Rosa, said Mrs. Steerforth quickly--for
coldness. Oh! It was only whether people, who are like each other in

creature into a pleasant and pleased companion. That he should succeed,
we did not remain in the dining-room more than five minutes after her
He did not touch her, or the chair from which she had risen, but sat
left his seat, and gone to her, and had put his arm laughingly about
went with Steerforth into his room to say Good night. Then he laughed

always equally loved, and cherished in my heart.
wondered that nothing troubled his repose, as I looked at him. But he
myself to the inn, and dined there, and engaged my bed.
for the asthma.

Barkis a year, to move to as he went by, I have known him forty years.
aint that. Some good and some bad goes, no doubt, to all callings. What
by which this troublesome breath of mine gets into action. But, Lord

apprehension seemed to please him, and he went on: Now I consider this
closer and closer, every day, is to see a sight. Now, you know, theres
 For--dont you see, said Mr. Omer, touching me with his pipe, it aint
that gives me a high opinion of him), and went and took as comfortable
I see, said I.
No good. A sad story, sir, however you come to know it. I never thought


to shrink from mine; and then she glided from the chair, and creeping


thatll cheer her up a bit, he said. Sit ye down by the fire, the
took to be the cause of her being so unlike herself--and I had leisure,
much pain and trouble. I learned, that, when he was past creeping out of

influence my presence had upon him in that state of his senses, I shall
I was on the point of asking him if he knew me, when he tried to stretch
out of her own savings, a little piece of ground in our old churchyard
since; a silver tobacco-stopper, in the form of a leg; an imitation
left with Barkis till called for; a fable he had elaborately written on
Commons than I had supposed. I examined the will with the deepest
was in the churchyard when it came, attended only by Peggotty and her
can make it otherwise than as it was.
it. Rain was falling heavily by that time, and it was a wild night; but
appeared to be fretting a little, in her old corner; and consequently

come natral!
I knowd I was never wanted before! cried Mrs. Gummidge, with a
here at the hour as shes a comin home, I puts the light in the winder.

after some further rubbing of his legs, as this is along of my havin
for you, in the form of a Sea Porkypine! Right for all that, said Mr.

died for, and would die for now--shes gone!
Davy?

the letter bore date on the previous night:
know no shame but me. God bless all! Ill pray for all, often, on my

reply; but my tongue was fettered, and my sight was weak.
house had been about to fall upon me.
Mr. Peggotty uttered no cry, and shed no tear, and moved no more, until
dead, but Id have drownded him, and thought it right!--Im a going to
too, and when I was a poor widder woman, and you took me in. Itll

but the entertainment of a thought that we could ever be re-united.
their distress prevailed, which was full of gentleness and delicacy. The
We have had a mort of talk, sir, said Mr. Peggotty to me, when we had
if I were going to London tomorrow? I told him I had not gone today,
ever a boat foundered, since there was darkness on the face of the deep,

Twice I called him by his name, in the tone in which I might have tried
gone! Masr Davy, he added; answering, as I think, my look; you hant
Danl, my good man, said she, you must eat and drink, and keep up
times, and tell me how you fare to feel upon your lone lorn journies.
held her in a sort of veneration. The work she did that day! There
together, and he having fallen asleep in perfect exhaustion, she broke
A deceitful, bad-hearted girl, said Mrs. Joram. There was no good in
become of her! Oh, how could she be so cruel, to herself and him!
Mrs. Joram was so unhappy that her husband came out to take care of
a knock at the door. There was a knocker upon the door, but it was not
and when I relieved her of the umbrella (which would have been an
the only spectator of this portentous behaviour, I exclaimed again,
Yes, its always so! she said. They are all surprised, these
years--hard, Mr. Copperfield--all day. I must live. I do no harm. If
for her bread and butter till she died of Air.
very intent expression all the while, and pursued:
the wall, began to go backwards and forwards again when she asked this
fender, why did you praise her so, and blush, and look disturbed?
of her! You were the first to mention her name. You owned to an old
Mowcher as she walked up and down the kitchen until she was out of
doll. I sat in a chair on the other side of the hearth, lost in unhappy

I am more likely than another, going about as I do, to find it out soon.
surprised if I can be distressed and serious. Good night!
In the morning I was joined by Mr. Peggotty and by my old nurse, and we
Moneys of no use to me no more, except to live. If you can lay it out
brother-in-law, I promised to do so. We then took leave of each other. I
bed. We were so fortunate as to find one, of a very clean and cheap
between them; with the view of sparing the mothers feelings as much
occasion of my last visit, answered to our summons, and went before
quite as steadfastly at her. Rosa Dartles keen glance comprehended all
contents, as far as I could see,--and returned it to him.
She is uneducated and ignorant.
among, not one of us thats lived along with her and had her for their
compensation--
and my son? What is your love to mine? What is your separation to ours?


hope, and I take away no hope. I have done what I thowt should be done,

returned. Dont you know that they are both mad with their own
Miss Dartle, I returned, you deepen the injury. It is sufficient
detest her. If I ever could reproach her with her infamous condition, I
the hill. He told me, as soon as I came up with him, that having now
coffee, butter, bacon, cheese, new loaves, firewood, candles, and walnut
like to be!--or if I should bring her back, my meaning is, that she
or hear the wind, but I thought of his solitary figure toiling on, poor
others, the more I sought for consolation in the image of Dora. The
a night-walk to Norwood, and, like the subject of a venerable riddle of
that I imparted to her, in a sufficiently roundabout way, my great
judges and doctors wouldnt have cared for Dora, if they had known
into an orderly train. We varied the legal character of these
to pay her bill. Mr. Spenlow had stepped out, old Tiffey said, to get a
thick, and was certainly as black, as ever; and his glance was as little
We looked at each other, and he addressed himself to Peggotty.

It rankled in your baby breast, he said. It embittered the life of
under his words, if I had had less difficulty in impressing upon
waiting for Mr. Tiffey to make out Peggottys bill of costs.
Murdstone let fall, I should say it was rather a good marriage.

her lodging, and Mr. Spenlow and I went into Court, where we had a
said, Look at the world, there was good and evil in that; look at the
Prerogative Office rather a queerly managed institution. Mr. Spenlow
of the deputy registrars, and clerks of seats), should not be obliged to
in short, this Prerogative Office of the diocese of Canterbury was
the Prerogative Office, and the country would cease to be glorious. He
it comes into its natural place. Mr. Spenlow and I falling into this
could be got for money. At six in the morning, I was in Covent Garden
name was Miss Mills. And Dora called her Julia. She was the bosom friend


calm interest in the unblighted hopes and loves of youth.
with its fragrance. Our eyes at those times often met; and my great
where we went. Perhaps it was near Guildford. Perhaps some Arabian-night
ladies washed the lettuces for him, and sliced them under his
she had any designs on Red Whisker, I cant say. Doras health was

I hardly knew what I did, I was burning all over to that extraordinary
and I sat by her, and I held her handkerchief and gloves, and I drank in
through the still evening and the dying light, with sweet scents

Then Miss Mills benignantly dismissed me, saying, Go back to Dora! and
consciousness to take my leave. So we parted; I riding all the way
How many times I went up and down the street, and round the
Market purchase! I cannot say that they were very like, or that
I began to think I would do it today.

say. And I am sure no one doubts your being at liberty to do whatever
distraction. Lovers had loved before, and lovers would love again; but
was anything dishonourable in that.
in my remembrance with Doras hand, that yesterday, when I saw such
that our love had begun in folly, and ended in madness! which dreadful
What an idle time! What an insubstantial, happy, foolish time! Of all
belief that nothing like it had ever been known.
at Yarmouth, on account of Emilys flight; and that on me it made a
own side, and of immoderate length, as she was very difficult indeed to
and informers. She named no names, she said; let them the cap fitted,
After this, Mrs. Crupp confined herself to making pitfalls on the
What did you say?

He saw, I suppose, that I could not help smiling at the simplicity of
Then, you know, being formed for society and admiration, and not being
Sophy nurses her. Sophys the fourth.
honestly with the view of doing my best to prevent the good-nature
my feelings, Copperfield, to see the matter settled with it, and Mrs.
motive. The fact is, Copperfield, I was unable to repurchase them at the
sense he had of its uncommon artfulness, are among the freshest things
Copperfield. It refers to the second obligation, which is not yet due.
offering a price, and was hailed by the relenting broker, and went back
and went his way up Tottenham Court Road, carrying the flower-pot
We looked at one another, without knowing what to make of this, and went
Holloa! said my aunt to Peggotty, who quailed before her awful


Nothing, maam, returned my aunt. I shall do very well, I thank you.
womans pouring-out!
still have been so, even if Mr. Dick, leaning over the great kite behind
think I prefer to sit upon this property of mine tonight?

As soon as I could recover my presence of mind, which quite deserted me
Trotwood, I dont want to swing a cat. I never do swing a cat.
smile, that I am sorry to say I was provoked into explaining to him
is to keep a cheerful countenance, and not let my aunt see that we are
of pocketing fragments of his bread and cheese; I have no doubt for the

misery.



discourse together.
As I bent forward, she put her tumbler on my knee to detain me, and
Silly, aunt!
of confectionery, do you, Trot?
Someone that I know, Trot, my aunt pursued, after a pause, though of
I dont say always!--come to nothing, still well be serious about it,
during the long term of my articles, when I was earning nothing; about
now I was at the office in a nightgown and boots, remonstrated with by
was on fire; and to be consulted in reference to the probability of its
and saw the sun shining in through the window at last.
I arrived at the office so soon, after all, that I had half an hours
closet door.
the spur of the moment, warned by the blank expression of his face--to
any such reason. It is not a professional course of proceeding. It is
Jorkins. But I know my partner, Copperfield. Mr. Jorkins is not a man
By no means, said Mr. Spenlow. But I have some experience of Mr.
as I had stated it to Mr. Spenlow. Mr. Jorkins was not by any means the
I am sorry to say, Mr. Copperfield, I cant advance your object, said
Oh! Personally! repeated Mr. Jorkins, in an impatient manner. I
Jorkins. But Mr. Jorkins has a way of stating his objections which often
sternest aspect, when a hackney-chariot coming after me, and stopping at
one I should have wished for but you!
Agnes at my side!
of their coming, to come too. You must not think my visit all friendly

company, when I might prefer to be alone. But I have no other reason to
evil or misfortune in the world.
my brandy, and that she would trouble her to walk out. Both of these
We began to talk about my aunts losses, and I told them what I had
for some time, and then, by the advice of her man of business, laid
at the other end of the world, and tumbled into space, for what I know;
Agnes had listened at first with suspended breath. Her colour still came

for any long term?
I have been thinking, Trotwood, said Agnes, diffidently, that if you
Because, continued Agnes, Doctor Strong has acted on his intention of
Doctor, stating my object, and appointing to call on him next day at
into which they had fallen.
I had not seen Mr. Wickfield for some time. I was prepared for a great
express. If I had seen an Ape taking command of a Man, I should hardly
might have been a dead-wall on the occasion in question, for any light
Youre a partner yourself, you know, returned my aunt, and thats

Deuce take the man! said my aunt, sternly, whats he about? Dont be
head as if she were making snaps or bounces at him. But he said to me
I had an old interest in you. Apart from that, what Uriah says I quite
You are not going, papa? said Agnes, anxiously. Will you not walk
or two. Mr. Wickfield, left to Agnes, soon became more like his former
on a sofa, Agnes pillowing his head and bending over him a little while;
fairy-figure shed some glimpses of her own pure light, that made it yet
shabby coat, and had no yearnings after gallant greys. My whole manner
reward, and Dora must be won.
room upstairs for my aunt. I came out again, hotter and faster than
wearing its heart out.
neighbourhood, and two or three rooks were on the grass, looking after
I hoped he was well, and Mrs. Strong too.
Markleham?
us. You are qualified for many good things. You have laid a foundation
Dear me! replied the Doctor. To think of that! Not that I mean to

exclaimed, with a triumph most delightful to behold, as if I had
I had expected, as he had not confined himself to making numerous

Mr. Jack Maldon shook hands with me; but not very warmly, I believed;
The Doctor looked grave, and said, as though he wished to change the
or to strengthen my confidence in, Mr. Jack Maldon.

I was curious to find out next morning, whether she had been. She had
the way to Doctors Commons, of the night when I had seen it looking at

that he was useful, or unless we could put him in the way of being
newspapers to me, as one of his hopes, I had put the two things

You see, said Mr. Dick, wistfully, if I could exert myself, Mr.

while Mr. Dick anxiously watched us from his chair, we concocted a
this confuse and fatigue him, and having his copy there, plainly before
No starving now, Trotwood, said Mr. Dick, shaking hands with me in a
You may possibly not be unprepared to receive the intimation that
disguise from our minds that we part, it may be for years and it may be
I was glad to find that Mr. Micawber had got rid of his dust and ashes,
became once more known to his sister, Miss Micawber, in whom, as Mr.
will desert Mr. Micawber.
I am aware, my dear Mr. Copperfield, pursued Mrs. Micawber, that I am
it is much more a sacrifice in a man of Mr. Micawbers abilities.
business habits, and the prudent suggestions, of Mrs. Micawber, have
remarkable of our English jurists. I believe it is unnecessary to add



Chancellor?
head, and said with ostentatious resignation:
connexion, will, no doubt, enable him to take advantage of any vacancy
wishing our friends health, happiness, and success in their new career.
thousand miles, I should offer a few valedictory remarks to two such

forty-one, ten, eleven and a half. My friend Copperfield will perhaps do
his I.O.U. in the hands of Traddles, and said he wished him well in

otherwise than as my letters darkly shadowed it forth. But another
rather favouring than discouraging the idea, Mrs. Crupp, of late the
herself could not have loved me better, or studied more how to make me
parting, and confided her brother to my friendship as Ham had done. We
I should so have liked to see her, only for a minute! And tell her that
up the bird-cage, and peep into the balcony to look for me, and run
she stared at me with the most delightful wonder.
you are so ridiculous.
loved her, so dearly, and so dearly; how I felt it right to offer to

aunt in her room upstairs.
Oh, please dont be practical! said Dora, coaxingly. Because it
that purpose, putting her own bright, rosy little mouth into kissing
that!--but if you will sometimes think--just to encourage yourself--that
Dora, said I, warming with the subject, is stony and rugged now, and
smelling-bottle, and in my agony of mind applied an ivory needle-case
was a poor labourer; and then cried for me, and embraced me, and asked
I then expounded to Miss Mills what I had endeavoured, so very
Book?
further asked her if she would take charge of the Cookery Book; and, if
dancing, La ra la, La ra la, until I felt a much greater Monster than

a triumphant little kiss, direct from her innocent heart, that I would

there then appeared a procession of new horrors, called arbitrary
from me before I began, and left my imbecile pencil staggering about the
against them. Standing by the table, with his finger in the page to keep
such things in the course of his Parliamentary career, and was made
There was nothing for it, but to turn back and begin all over again. It
looked at me in a distant, ceremonious manner, and coldly requested me
flutings, for sticking knives and forks in, which, happily for mankind,

No, thank you! said Mr. Spenlow, coldly, as I mechanically offered
Miss Murdstone cast down her eyes, shook her head as if protesting
little wave of his hand.
depravity of the human heart, at least I may--I must--be permitted, so
kisses, work-boxes, and small articles of jewellery--that, of course,
to ask, Mr. Copperfield, if you have anything to say in reply?

before. I love Miss Spenlow to that extent--
Copperfield?
When I explained my altered position to you, sir, I began again,
the sensible course.

I was moving quietly towards the door, with the intention of saying that
would be better for yourself, and all of us, if you WERE mercenary, Mr.

There was a serenity, a tranquillity, a calm sunset air about him, which
I submitted; and, with a countenance as expressive as I was able to
about Dora, that I wonder I did not take up my hat and rush insanely to
that it was all nonsense; and he had nothing more to say to her. He
Dora. That was all, and what was that! I entreated Miss Mills to see

last, and then Love was avenged.
ticket-porters standing outside talking together, and some half-dozen

said Tiffey, having sent his own groom home by the coach, as he

and table seemed to wait for him, and his handwriting of yesterday was
In the trouble of this state of mind--not exclusively my own, I hope,
always crying, Oh, dear papa! oh, poor papa! But she had not said No,
in which my Dora would be placed--as, in whose guardianship, and so
Oh, I know he had! said I.
shutting up both his eyes as he shook his head: if you had been in the
what he had paid, or of what he died possessed. It was considered likely
myself, when Miss Mills still reported to me, that my broken-hearted
Putney! So they went, very soon after the funeral.
this in moon likewise? J. M.) D., J. M. and J. took airing in carriage.
and caressed. Drew ideal picture of D. C. on verge of tomb. D. again
balustrades. Says he wants a pound, and knows a dog. Declines to explain
had drawn a magic circle round the innocent goddess of my heart, which
whether or no to give the finishing touch to that renunciation of
to but a doubtful position. The business had been indifferent under Mr.
were a good many of these too. As our house now wanted business on any
line) walking about for some days with a black eye. Any one of these
in my ear, was with great difficulty prevented from taking me up in
appeared so long, since I had been a schoolboy there, that I wondered
the ground floor, where Uriah Heep had been of old accustomed to sit,
said Mr. Micawber, glancing at some letters he was writing, the mind is


evolutions on his stool, allow me to offer a remark! I am here, in
Though I saw an uneasy change in Mr. Micawber, which sat tightly on

character of our intercourse.

And patient, Agnes? I inquired, with a little hesitation.
much for the better! What is it? What is your secret, Agnes?
I have come to peace and happiness. I come home, now, like a tired
weakness, and led me on to tell all that had happened since our last
upon, because she is the soul of purity and truth--but rather difficult
as she expressed in making this reply. It was as if I had seen her
write to those two ladies. Dont you think that any secret course is an
their permission to visit sometimes, at their house. Considering that
God bless her, she is as easily scared as a bird, said I. It might
I found Uriah in possession of a new, plaster-smelling office, built out
I am sure, Master Copperfield--I should say Mister, but the other
her rheumatics, as the wind then was, than the drawing-room or
beg leave to differ from you. Dont you see a thinness in him?
You are too solicitous about him. He is very well.
like a net; and as she worked away with those Chinese chopsticks of
assigned to her.

of his body, which might have been either propitiatory or derisive, he
Ah! But you know were so very umble, he returned. And having such a

may!
have thought of telling to--Jack Ketch.
Oh, Master Copperfield! he said. If you had only had the
him.
I am not fond of professions of humility, I returned, or professions
always being dinned into you and me at school; its what goes down best.
I might understand he was resolved to recompense himself by using his
growing too old for a bachelor; and once looked at Agnes so, that I
Wickfield, sitting, such a contrast to him, at the end of the table,
effort that he made against it; the struggle between his shame in
admire--adore her.
good a right to it as another man. I have a better right to it than any
pride and joy. I tried to bring her idea before him in any form; I even
quiet, and your house and home too, said Uriah, with a sulky, hurried,
should I not be in all the worlds power if I am in yours?
have infected everything I touched. I have brought misery on what I
best, meaning Uriah Heep, for he has always been at my elbow,
He laid his head upon her shoulder, as if he were oppressed with heavy
now!
Dear Agnes, I said, it is presumptuous for me, who am so poor in all
long afterwards, I saw that look subside, as it did now, into the lovely

already, and he were smacking his lips over it.
for herself, comprising the full extent of the bedrooms from wall to
I had been too busy to observe, until after she was gone to bed, that
come on. It was a heavy, settled fall, I recollect, in great flakes; and
On the steps of the church, there was the stooping figure of a man, who

a-going to turn in somewheers.
from his hat and clothes, and brushed it away from his face, while I was
left alone, she used to talk to me a deal about the sea, and about


the poor people, I found they knowd about me. They would set me down at

all three, and told me how they travelled, and where they was. I made
heerd her cry out, Uncle! and seen her fall like death afore me. Many
I travelled heer, and I travelled theer, but I found no Emly, and I
been gone a week. A fifty pound Bank note, in a sheet of paper, directed
my wicked hand! But try, try--not for my sake, but for uncles goodness,
Dear, if your heart is hard towards me--justly hard, I know--but,
untouched like the previous sum, and he refolded it in the same way.
Its money, sir, said Mr. Peggotty, unfolding it a little way. Ten
ready to help him, you understand, and his is ready to help them. Hes
again. The face was gone from the door. I still saw the snow drifting
Id go ten thousand mile, he said, Id go till I dropped dead, to lay

both parties--which I thought rather an alarming expression, not
kind permission, by his friend Mr. Thomas Traddles of the Inner Temple.
However, it was so much to him that for India he was bound, and



just mentioned, did you make a regular proposal to her family? Was there
with every possible precaution to Mrs. Crewler, the effect upon her was
Why, I cant say they did, he returned. When we had comparatively
charming girl, but she has a great deal of feeling. In fact, they all
are married. It will be much more like a funeral, than a wedding. And
in it, into a quiet little drawing-room on the ground-floor, commanding


My sister Lavinia, said she being conversant with matters of this
secret love; though I must say there was a picture of him in the house
never moved her arms. She sometimes played tunes upon them with her
Miss Lavinia was going on to make some rejoinder, when Miss Clarissa,
all parties, if Doras mama, when she married our brother Francis, had
You ask permission of my sister Clarissa and myself, Mr. Copperfield,
least know what I meant.
requesting that I would not interrupt the oracle, I begged pardon.
light--inclinations of very young people, pursued Miss Lavinia, are
Lavinia, an intensified enjoyment of this new and fruitful subject of
made a favourable impression.
Sister Lavinia, said Miss Clarissa, take my smelling-bottle.
better at the present moment. Sister Lavinia, proceed.
But, pursued Miss Lavinia,--but, we would prefer to regard those
In this position of affairs, said Miss Lavinia, again referring to
this promise, I beg you to take time to consider it.
little birds hopped out with great dignity; leaving me to receive the
dinner, every Sunday, if it should suit his convenience. Our hour is
letter, will perhaps call upon us. When visiting is better for the
conducted into another room. There I found my blessed darling stopping

Oh, but we dont want any best creatures! pouted Dora.
should have stayed there, oblivious of Traddles, if Miss Lavinia had not
She knows enough of the piano to teach it to her little sisters, said


rubbed on, all things considered, much more smoothly than I could have
harmony.
reported at the door.


accounts as I had once promised I would. I brought the volume with me on
Now suppose, my pet, that we were married, and you were going to buy a
So, when I once asked Dora, with an eye to the cookery-book, what she
Lavinia, that she treated the darling of my heart a little too much like
and which I know to be the strong part of my character, if it have any
tried with all my heart to do well; that whatever I have devoted myself
I will not repeat here. My narrative proceeds to Agnes, with a thankful
person is a little jealous--leastways, anxious to keep an eye on the
his fish-like hand on mine, Im not a ladys man in general, sir, and I
Yes, said I. By your look.



Perhaps so, Master Copperfield, he replied. But Ive got a motive, as
doubled himself up with laughter. With perfectly silent laughter. Not
making up my mind that I should like her to look exactly as she looked
been so pretty. But, when we went into the room, and it turned pale, she
the pleasantest tea-table in the world. Miss Clarissa presided. I cut
gone.

hand idly busying itself with one of the buttons of my coat, I might
I wonder why you ever fell in love with me? said Dora, beginning on
give me, more thoughtfully than usual, that precious little kiss--once,

guardian angel than mine; and you seem so now, Agnes.
stars that made it seem so noble.
Although I think I had never really feared it, in any season of cool
and Agnes, pointing to it, bade me good night.
hall, and gently opening the door, looked in.
may keep the door shut. We neednt make it known to ALL the town.
custom to do when I was quite a little fellow, but did not lift his grey
a wide berth. Howsever, at last I have made up my mind to speak plain;
honour, whether hed ever been of this opinion long ago, or not. Come,
My dear Strong, said Mr. Wickfield in a tremulous voice, my good
Maldon abroad to effect a desirable separation.
considerations only. I make no allowance for innumerable feelings
duty to you; and that I did sometimes, if I must say all, feel averse

twice or thrice across the room. Presently he returned to where his
truth and honour of the dear lady who has been the subject of this

He walked across the room, and came back to the same place; holding
My life with this lady has been very happy. Until tonight, I have

so adorned by, and so adorning, the perfect simplicity of his manner,
I needed but the sound of his voice to be so madly enraged as I never
He caught the hand in his, and we stood in that connexion, looking at
I have shown you often enough, said I, that I despise you. I have

can you make yourself so inferior to me, as to show such a bad spirit?
him what I always had expected, and had never yet been disappointed in,
he had retorted or openly exasperated me, it would have been a relief
Agnes and her father had been gone a week, before we resumed our usual
sometimes observed her rise, with her eyes full of tears, and go out
her hands, and weep, I cannot say how sorrowfully.
the person of Mr. Dick.
(and got up earlier to make it more) to these perambulations. If he had
the little leaves; expressing as no philosopher could have expressed,
visit at the Doctors was still in progress, I observed that the postman
the stipulation of implicit confidence which I beg to impose. But my
You will picture to yourself, my dear Mr. Copperfield, what the
with great difficulty, and even under fearful threats that he will

Weeks, months, seasons, pass along. They seem little more than a summer
twenty-one. But this is a sort of dignity that may be thrust upon one.
My dear old Traddles has tried his hand at the same pursuit, but it
them. Altogether, I am well off, when I tell my income on the fingers
bundle, and a yard measure under his arm. A dressmaker, always stabbed
horribly frightened.

Masonic understanding between us. Traddles is not at all wanted, but is
That is about Miss Wickfields time, is it not?
pleasant,--and is one of the most genial, unaffected, frank, engaging
unsettled kind of state; as if I had got up very early in the morning a
little peg; the guitar-case quite at home on its heels in a corner;
scream because I tumble the bonnet, and Dora laughs and cries at once,
dress, and asks Jip if I have got a beautiful little wife, and whether
Mr. Dick have a general effect about them of being all gloves.

infection of good-humour which renders it indispensable to set those
Of our kneeling down together, side by side; of Doras trembling less


Of Doras making a long series of surprised discoveries that she


seated opposite, I would lean back in my chair, and think how queer it
kept house for us. I have still a latent belief that she must have been
which, the walls were not thick, and, whenever he passed the evening at

Dont you think, my dear, said I, it would be better for you to
quaint little mockery of being industrious, that quite delighted me in

curls from side to side, and said, You cruel, cruel boy! so many
made quite unwell by being obliged to eat underdone veal in a hurry;
I took another turn across the room, full of love for my pretty wife,
much that I wouldnt on any account have even mentioned that you
It was two or three hours past midnight when I got home. I found my
I assure you, aunt, said I, I have been quite unhappy myself all

I am still, and I always shall be. But you and I have done one another
These are early days, Trot, she pursued, and Rome was not built in a

could assist us, to take much notice of it.
tea-spoons, and also about the little sums she had borrowed in my
in a shop was a signal for the damaged goods to be brought out
Excise returns of the period may have exhibited any increase in the

nothing had a place of its own, except Jips pagoda, which invariably

I could not imagine why Dora had been making tempting little faces at
Dora shook her head, and diamonds twinkled in her eyes.
capers. If I had permitted him, I am satisfied that Traddles would have
a game or two at cribbage; and Dora singing to the guitar the while,


going to be angry with me, say to yourself, its only my child-wife!
This appeal of Doras made a strong impression on me. I look back on the
would walk over the page, wagging his tail, and smear them all out. Her
would take up a pen, and begin to write, and find a hair in it. Then
clouded--and for me!--and I would go softly to her, and say:
the remembrance of her natural gaiety when I first strayed into her
could have wished my wife had been my counsellor; had had more character
I was pleased to see was seldom vexed now. She was bright and cheerful
was shutting up my desk.


triumph in this connexion with my work, and her delight when I wanted a
waist. I seldom found that the places to which they belonged were
a voice that sounded cheerfully all over the house:
Like some other mothers, whom I have known in the course of my life,
My dear soul, she said to him one day when I was present, you know
dont--now do you?---enter into the same pursuits and fancies as Annie?
that you dont expect, as many elderly people do expect, old heads on
a great deal of pleasure, and she never flinched in her perseverance
It rarely happened now that Mr. Maldon accompanied them. Sometimes
But her abiding reliance was on Mr. Dick. That man had evidently an

as if he were loaded with it, Mr. Dick sat down with greater gravity

In short, boy, said Mr. Dick, dropping his voice to a whisper, I am
Now you are a scholar, Trotwood, said Mr. Dick. You are a fine

when I had done, and sat considering, with his eyes upon my face, and


that I was getting it, and now I have got it. After what you have said
debates to vex the evening air; and I remember how the leaves smelt like
newspaper in her hand, and said, out of breath, My goodness gracious,
Her daughter looked round from the window quickly.
Doctor--Annie, my love, attend to the very words--this simply expresses
subject of a declaration and an offer, I said, My dear, there is no
aunts rubbing her nose violently, by the way, as a mild vent for her
Astonishment, than anything else I can think of.
that has come between us!
request; and it made no impression on anybody else; so Mrs. Markleham
to any suspicion that my heart has sometimes whispered to me; if I have
right. I could not have resisted its entreaty, if the assurance that it
which she occasionally interrupted it, defy description.

to give you pain, mama, forgive me. I have borne pain first, often and
Not so mama, said Annie; but I make him what he was. I must do that.
It was so great a change: so great a loss, I felt it, at first, said



marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose.
worse of him, until the night of his departure for India. That night I

Do not speak to me yet! Let me say a little more! Right or wrong, if
used to be afraid that I had better have remained your pupil, and almost
truth--has been made clear tonight; and by an accident I have also come
many imperfections. Every succeeding year I have known this better, as I
With that, my aunt pulled him by the sleeve, and nodded to me; and we
that old Animal, said my aunt, with strong emphasis. Its very much


As it was, I thought as little of it as I might. But my mind could not

garden, and left to make my presence known to her myself. She was
I am told you wish to speak to me, Miss Dartle, said I, standing near
Yes! From him, she said, with a laugh. If she is not found, perhaps
to know what is known of her?
who, with undiminished respectability, made me a bow, and took up his


prospect, and she bit her nether lip to stop that busy mouth.
have expected.
good as anybody the young woman could have aspired to in a regular way:

Mr. Littimer bent his head, as much as to say, Indeed, sir? But youre
she may have had assistance from the boatmen, and the boatmens wives

and what her anxiety of mind was likely to be, I took the liberty of
to utter any more conciliatory word, whether they intercepted a letter
maintain.


passionate finger up, may be alive,--for I believe some common things
still; and well I knew the bright eye with its lofty look, that had been
saved from again falling into the snares of a designing enemy, well!
I answered that I had been some time married.
I took the hand she held out with a dignified, unbending air, and it
feet.
had not gone out yet, and I should find him in his room upstairs.
Of Emly!

And yet, he added, Masr Davy, I have felt so sure as she was

object!--do you remember Martha?
Masr Davy! he replied in astonishment. That night when it snew so

feet. God forgive me, theers a difference now!
I recalled to his remembrance the morning after her departure, when we


suppose the strange fascination in the secrecy and mystery of so
and the advance she had of us when she struck off, we were in the narrow
soon as she came here, and saw the water, she stopped as if she had come
part, carcases of houses, inauspiciously begun and never finished,
a blighting influence seemed to have proceeded from it over the whole
at the lights crookedly reflected in the strong tide, inspired a dread
mine was laid upon her; and when she raised her frightened eyes and saw
country places, where there was once no harm in it--and it creeps
own, for his appearance alarmed me--was deadly cold.

Are you composed enough, said I, to speak on the subject which so
such kind help! Was it you, sir?
and right. Is it likely I would try to make her what I am myself,
grief was terrible.
What shall I ever do! she said, fighting thus with her despair. How
distracted manner; and, when she was silent, gently raised her.
been--wheer not--fur to seek my dear niece. My dear niece, he repeated
Whereby, said he, I know, both as she would go to the wurelds
spoke of her being pleasant, kind, and gentle to you. Bless her, I knew
We both replied together, Yes!
We judged it expedient, now, to tell her all we knew; which I recounted
accept any money, nor could I exact any promise from her that she would
the only certain thing that saves me from the river.

and when we parted, with a prayer for the success of this fresh effort,

chink.
You ask me why! returned my aunt. What a heart you must have!
You stripped me of the greater part of all I ever had, said my aunt.
him. Who is he?

him generously. He had been so cruel to me, that I might have effected
I once believed him to be, I wouldnt have even this shadow of my idle

them, incidentally, it is only as a part of my progress.
I now write of the time when I had been married, I suppose, about a year
anything in the way of a relative, that I could discover, except a

certain revelations touching a hamper in the cellar, which we believed
that he had no idea of this, but conceived that he was making me amends

but, not succeeding, ordered him into his Pagoda, and sat looking at
incur the serious responsibility of spoiling everyone who comes into

My darling girl, I retorted, I really must entreat you to be
I ever been married? Why hadnt I said, even the day before we went to
disconcerted her, and myself too. I talked to her on the subjects which
had no other effect upon Dora than to depress her spirits, and make her
my scheme, which had had a more promising appearance in words than in
felt, and which indeed it was.
Done what, my dear? For she made no effort to proceed.
Is that what you have been trying? cried Dora. Oh what a shocking

She shook her head, turned her delighted bright eyes up to mine, kissed
changed at all; but it was as undefined as ever, and addressed me like
Between these two irreconcilable conclusions: the one, that what I felt

always present to my mind. I awoke with them, often, in the night; I


and was on the point of losing em all, hed bark at me with his last
you want a dog to race with, Little Blossom, he has lived too well for
You are not offended, said Dora. Are you?
said Dora. We may keep one another company a little longer!
moving mass of shawls and pillows. Mr. Dick would not have relinquished

the prismatic hues of memory, has ever afforded me, as it ever must
so circumstanced, to adopt the language of compliment, or of
destroyed--that my heart is no longer in the right place--and that I no

Mrs. Micawber is not in confidential possession of my intentions.
Micawber.

does not take place. Mr. T. will not require me to depict my feelings,
he now allow me to throw myself on his friendly consideration? Oh yes,
any case, he will have the benevolence to consider this communication

absorption in my own affairs, my experience of the family, and my
the time, we found Mr. Micawber already there. He was standing with his
reference to the physical welfare of Mrs. Copperfield in esse, and
existence fleeted by.
have been familiar with every stone in the place. If I betray weakness,
over his shoulder, on the road to the tomb, which, but for the impiety
My dear Copperfield, returned Mr. Micawber, bursting into a state of
is, a pattern, and a bright example. My dear Copperfield, she is the
arrows in my bosom. You had better leave me, if you please, to walk the

exceedingly on one side, and a shirt-collar pulled up to his eyes.
again with greater vigour than before.

something, and a counter-disposition to reveal nothing, that I was in a

other appliances he used in making punch.
Mr. Micawber, with a random but expressive flourish of his knife,

My aunt clapped her hands, and we all started up as if we were
hear a word.
I really had some fear of Mr. Micawbers dying on the spot. The manner
words, but for the amazing energy with which this word inspired him when
the following pastoral note was brought to me from a neighbouring
uniting our voices to yours, in the well-known strain of the Immortal

I trembled for the agony it might one day be to him to have his strong
me. All his journeys were ruggedly performed; for he was always
One evening, at this hour, he told me that he had found Martha waiting

the occasional droppings from their boughs, prevailed.

she desired to remain quiet, and feeling that it was my own natural

a plebeian pauper, and each party to the ill-assorted union shrunk away
Whats this! said Martha, in a whisper. She has gone into my room. I
my lips. I could only see, of the room beyond, that it was pretty large;
not ashamed of the face that has done so much?
before it. It was succeeded by a moments pause.
So! said Rosa Dartle, with a contemptuous laugh, I see her at last!
abhorrence of you, it would freeze it up. Our sex! You are an honour to

agony your love would cause me when I fell away from good, you never
The miserable vanity of these earth-worms! she said, when she had so
of HIS home--where I live. Here, she said, stretching out her hand with
when he comes to die, and his mind is troubled with it, that he used all
Emily had shrunk out of my view. There was no reply.
have much preferred to be the object of the latter. But, when she
story!--I have something more to say. Attend to it; for what I say Ill
I am of a strange nature, perhaps, Rosa Dartle went on; but I cant
was no relenting in Rosa Dartles smile. What, what, shall I do!
his, thank God!



Would you? said my aunt, with short good-nature. Then I am sure I
right; and when she did, she kneeled down at my feet, and kiender said

for she was a-coming by. She heerd herself a-crying out, like as if

She had been summat timorous and down, said Mr. Peggotty, and had sat,
found space for Emly in it,--her husband was away at sea,--and she kep
her eyes, and the roarings in her ears; and theer was no today, nor
Sunday morning; but the vine leaves as she see at the winder, and the
of that country was quite gone from her, and she was forced to make
and get to her own country. The husband was come home, then; and the two
I doent know, said Mr. Peggotty, for sure, when her art begun to
the moment as she lighted heer, all so desolate, she found (as she
hurried, upon Emly in her sleep. She says to her, Rise up from worse
didnt tell Emly what she come out fur, lest her art should fail, and
repose, with a resolution in it that might have conquered lions.
future, good friend? I need scarcely ask you.
aboard--and we shall take our passage in her.
Mr. Peggotty, shaking his head, theers not so much left him, that he

He forgot nobody. He thought of everybodys claims and strivings, but
banknotes--fifty pound, and ten. To them I wish to add the money as she


me, and soon recognized me with great delight.
clever and merry as ever you see anything! And I tell you what--its a
done? Being my limbs, what does it signify? Why, my limbs only made my
Valentines. What more can a man expect? Whats his limbs to that!
separate and indiwidual wollumes--one, two, three; I am as proud as
unfortunate young woman, Martha, now?
necessary to make any show, I dont undertake to tell you. But its all

and Jorams at a ball.
Omer who could not be easily conveyed upstairs; and then hid her pretty
removed here for good; and had let her own house to the successor of
serenest of the party.
taken out of the window, Mr. Peggotty swung in his old hammock in the
a little way together, when he said, without looking at me:
to her, for you, in case I could not tell it; if there is anything
struggling in her mind, and would have counselled with me, and I might
I wasnt greatly hurt: still loving of her, and mourning for her:
We doent say so, but so twill be, and better so. The last you see on
The door of the boat-house stood open when I approached; and, on
Mrs. Gummidge, leaning on her basket, made no observation.

Danl, said Mrs. Gummidge, suddenly deserting her basket, and clinging
what a long voyage, and what a hard life tis! Yes, I do, Danl! I can
affection, in a homely rapture of devotion and gratitude, that he well
four-and-twenty hours of being come, my aunt and I consulted how we
Tut, Blossom! laughed my aunt. You know you cant do without me!
putting back her hair, and looking wonderingly at my aunt and me, why
Youll come back with so much to tell me, that itll take at least
down to Canterbury by the Dover mail that night.
they sounded, told me sorrowfully of change in everything; told me of
sleep. Among those who were stirring in the shops, I saw my ancient
Here he is, said I, and not in his legal attire!


Perhaps, under such circumstances, madam and gentlemen, said Mr.
Stipendiary I am.
old house, without saying one word on the way.

had none worth mentioning; but he frowned to that degree that he almost
I felt ashamed to let him take my hand, but I did not know yet what else

or I might perhaps have waited on you long ago, Mr. Heep.
done so, in any case), by the entrance of Agnes, now ushered in by Mr.

You are a dissipated fellow, as all the world knows, he said, with an
Theres no love between us. You were always a puppy with a proud
Trotwood, you had better stop this; or Ill stop your husband shorter
Who are you to make yourself known? retorted Uriah. And what do you

of getting the better of us--though perfectly consistent with the
to me, half whining, and half abusive.
edge of his table with his hands in his pockets, and one of his splay

The relish with which Mr. Micawber described himself as a prey to these
disabled his right hand. It dropped at the wrist, as if it were broken.
His enemy, muttering to himself, after wringing his wounded hand for
me to solicit from--HEEP--pecuniary advances towards the support of
called into requisition for the falsification of business, and the
is ready elsewhere), of the various malpractices of a minor nature,

out, thus, one particular sum of trust-money, amounting to twelve six

Ury, Ury! Be umble, and make terms, my dear!
We will endeavour to provide something that WILL do, and do for you
of one idea; as, that they utterly detest, abominate, and abjure, or so

and there defaced by fire, but legible to anyone. I never attested any
Copperfield, Im sure you know that he was always very umble, sir!

What do you look at me for?
of the avaricious, false, and grasping--HEEP. That the engrossing object
miscellaneous catalogue of unscrupulous chicaneries--gradually
accusations; and then, with my ill-starred family, to disappear from the
cope, that what I have done, I did, in despite of mercenary and selfish
clanking open. It was empty.
What was my astonishment when I beheld my aunt, who had been profoundly
Whether my aunt supposed, for the moment, that he kept her property in
What do you want done?
Suppose I havent got it, he interrupted.
Certainly, replied Traddles; but, in the meanwhile, and until
was all true, and if he didnt do what we wanted, she would, and much
little trouble; for she not only returned with the deed, but with the


return to her father, as yet unable to bear more than the dawn of
letter to me, was sensibly affected. The stranger leaped. The twins
prospects, which appeared, to the best of my judgement, to be anything
There are no more at present, returned Mrs. Micawber.
rather than in sacred edifices.
something?
Capital, madam, capital, urged Mr. Micawber, gloomily.

not say, at present, might he aspire to be Governor, or anything of that
and family; and that something of an extraordinary nature will turn up
CHAPTER 53. ANOTHER RETROSPECT
child-wife running in the sunlight with her old friend Jip.
What a strange rest and pause in my life there seems to be--and in all
Oh what a foolish fellow you were, Doady, when I gave you one!

I will write to her, my dear.


has been perfectly contented and cheerful. We are now alone.
often thought of saying, lately. You wont mind? with a gentle look.
each other as a boy and girl, and forgotten it. I have begun to think I
in his home. She wouldnt have improved. It is better as it is.

as it is!
and by her own, with every fascination wherein such love is rich. Would
He lies down at my feet, stretches himself out as if to sleep, and with


me so when I could bear to hear it--on her bosom, with a smile. From my
proceeded by appointment straight to Mr. Micawbers house; where, and at
shore, and our Bark is on the sea.
up. We might not, said Mr. Micawber, looking round the room as if it
an example to my son, that these arrangements should be concluded as
My aunt observed, that in a case where both parties were willing to
when permitted, by the rugged hirelings who had them in charge, to
fell back on me, I suppose from old habit, to whomsoever else she might
my family, I necessarily have formed an opinion, delusive though it may

of my family, Mr. Micawber might have an opportunity of developing his
be incapable of it. If so, that is their misfortune. I can pity their
his arm, and glancing at the heap of books and papers lying before


Theres Mr. Dick, too, said Traddles, has been doing wonders! As soon
even his impaired power of concentrating his memory and attention on
might now wind up his business, and his agency-trust, and exhibit no
a friend to whom I am so grateful, and owe so much.
Have you thought how, Agnes?
its gone, I can bear it; and if its not gone, I shall be glad to get

Dont congratulate me, anybody! exclaimed my aunt. How so, sir?
interest on a pretended principal which he knew did not exist, made
Why, the fact is, returned Traddles, Mr. Micawber had so completely
seemed to consider himself hardly less indebted to me, than to Mr.
courses will become crookeder, at any moment, for the least reason,
right, for rights sake, when we reflect what terms he might have made

it be? Five hundred pounds?
bring each of them to bear upon the other, for the common advantage. We
with a nod.
that if he could do us, or any of us, any injury or annoyance, no doubt
been discussing your emigration, with many apologies to you for keeping
that congenial employment, or the making of punch, could impart in full
use it to handle the serpents that have poisoned the life-blood of his

Would you ride with me a little way tomorrow morning? asked my aunt.

He died the night before we went to Canterbury? said I. My aunt
changed!
My dear Madam, and Copperfield,

debt and costs, in the noble name of Miss Trotwood; and that myself and
vividly impressed by it, that its fury has yet seemed raging in my quiet
tenderly he had taken leave of her, and how manfully and quietly he
her the opportunity.
Trot, my dear, she said, when I opened my eyes, I couldnt make up my
I have got your message. Oh, what can I write, to thank you for your
May I tell her as you doent see no hurt int, and as youll be so kind
Though he anxiously endeavoured to dissuade me, I saw that he was of my
colour of the smoke from damp fuel--of flying clouds, tossed up into
coach would be blown over. Sweeping gusts of rain came up before this
great trees lying torn out of the earth, and whole ricks scattered about

excited and uneasy; children, huddling together, and peering into older
monster. Undulating hills were changed to valleys, undulating valleys
in which his skill was required; but that he would be back tomorrow
long exposure to the fierce wind had confused me. There was that jumble
at all likely? If he gave me the least reason to think so, I would go
tumult of the sea, were more fearful than in the morning. But there
and indefinable horror; and when I awoke--or rather when I shook off
For hours I lay there, listening to the wind and water; imagining, now,
company. One man, referring to the topic they had been discussing, asked
friends, but who they were I dont know, at the siege of some town in a
haste, sir, if you want to see her! Its thought, down on the beach,
it had then presented, bore the expression of being swelled; and the
would stave it in. Some efforts were even then being made, to cut this
were too tremendous for any human work to suffer long. As he spoke,
I knew, not to let those two lost creatures perish before our eyes.
flight--awoke me to a knowledge of his danger. I held him back with both
I was swept away, but not unkindly, to some distance, where the people
cap on,--not like a sailors cap, but of a finer colour; and as the few
no thought of that. He seemed hurriedly to give them some directions for
was in every face. They drew him to my very feet--insensible--dead.
me:

already.
out of the yard in a chaise, followed by what I had in charge, there
way leading to the disused door. The wind had quite gone down, and

her return, she brought a message, to the effect that Mrs. Steerforth
tidings. The scar sprung into view that instant. She withdrew herself
misfortunes.
I have.
herself to bear what I had to tell; but I should rather have entreated

when, in his inheritance of your nature, and in your pampering of his
You, resent his self-will! she exclaimed. You, injured by his haughty
would have been devoted--would have trod your paltry whimpering under
was little less--yet with an eager remembrance of it, in which the
She stood with her bright angry eyes confronting the wide stare, and the
No one can have loved him better, no one can hold him in dearer
loosen the dress.
was just the same, they told me; Miss Dartle never left her; doctors
these emotions. It was, to conceal what had occurred, from those who
of the wilderness, long accustomed to live out of the confines of
visible in a Guernsey shirt, and the shaggiest suit of slops I ever
The Micawber family were lodged in a little, dirty, tumble-down

Heyday! said my aunt, thats soon. Is it a sea-going fact, Mr.
I allude to--in short, Punch. Under ordinary circumstances, I should
of the family I now found to be provided with similar formidable
Here, a boy came in to say that Mr. Micawber was wanted downstairs.
The loss, Micawber, observed his wife, has been my familys, not
which Mrs. Micawber was not wholly free from an apprehension that words
transaction in his pocket-book--being very particular, I recollect,
amount with compound interest to two years, fifteen calendar months, and
My dear Miss Trotwood, she replied, I shall only be too happy
I think, now, how odd it was, but how wonderfully like Mr. Micawber,
exciting, alow and aloft, that when the lookout, stationed in the
My dear, said Mr. Micawber, Britannia must take her chance. I am
and Albion.
vitally important that Mr. Micawber should feel his position.
in this idea.
connexion with Britain? An important public character arising in that
in the country which gave him birth, and did NOT give him employment!
establish a good name, and be beloved, go where he would.
that they were gone.
gloom, taking his arm with an air of friendship and protection, and
established on stools, or in dwarf elbow-chairs; others, despairing of
that my nurse was crying on a chest beside me; and that Mrs. Gummidge,
that time, but I wrung his hand; and if ever I have loved and honoured
see the ship wafted on her course. It was then calm, radiant sunset.
good-bye to me. Aye, Emily, beautiful and drooping, cling to him with
ghosts of many hopes, of many dear remembrances, many errors, many
friendship, interest; of all that had been shattered--my first trust,
it, and I said in my heart that it could never be lightened.
painful load through all, and hardly conscious of the objects as they
by-ways of the mountains. If those awful solitudes had spoken to my
heights of snow, that closed it in, like eternal clouds. The bases of
serenity, great Nature spoke to me; and soothed me to lay down my weary
She gave me no advice; she urged no duty on me; she only told me, in her

beginning of my sorrow. I determined to make no resolutions until the
English words.
England, was quite restored. I had seen much. I had been in many
But the thought came into my mind as a new reproach and new regret, when
passionate tenderness upon another object; and what I might have done,
I had always felt my weakness, in comparison with her constancy and
long-subsisting relation must be undisturbed.
quicksands of my mind, from the time of my departure to the time of my

Cathedral looking older.
The well-known shops, however, with their cheerful lights, did something
aware of it myself.
Never heard his name, said the waiter, in a rich husky voice.
a bit of fish and a steak, and stood before the fire musing on his
port wine below; and both England, and the law, appeared to me to be
meet whom a pint of special port seemed to come out of the cellar of its
storey, I ascended the staircase. A crazy old staircase I found it to
else. I therefore knocked again.
where I came into the presence of my old friend (also out of breath),
brown you are! How glad I am! Upon my life and honour, I never was so
both laughing, and both wiping our eyes, we both sat down, and shook

so extremely brown, my dear Copperfield! God bless my soul, how happy I

pick up the combs they had dropped out of their hair, and going on in
delightful.


furniture is plain and serviceable, you perceive. And as to plate, Lord
conversation in private with the Reverend Horace. I dwelt upon the fact
Copperfield, and ought to be a Bishop; or at least ought to have enough
brothers, and so forth, are sometimes rather selfish in such cases.

deserve to feel!
We all sat round the fire; while the sharp boy, who I now divined had

their submission of themselves to all their whims, was the pleasantest
How many children Sophy could have taken care of in her time, I cant
withered Grays Inn, they could not have brightened it half so much.
to tracing prospects in the live-coals, and to thinking, as they broke
I was thinking. And had I truly disciplined my heart to this, and could
little head on one side, and a glass of warm sherry negus at his
in your countenance is familiar to me, sir; but I couldnt lay my hand
Well, sir, observed Mr. Chillip, I hope youll excuse me, if I am
I never had the happiness of seeing my father, I observed.
in which you will be glad to hear I am doing well. My daughter is
family, sir?

and thoughtfully exclaim, Ah, dear me! We remember old times, Mr.

Mr. Chillip; but she is quite a shadow now. Would it be considered

I am very happy to receive such support in my opinion, sir, he

evidence before a Commission of Lunacy, touching the state of mind of a
pulse must have made two or three more beats in a minute, than it had

marriage-ceremony with her presence; were among our topics--already

regrets. Oh, Trot, I seemed to hear my aunt say once more; and I

Well? Hey? Any what? said my aunt, sharply.
A prosperous one? said I.

The well-remembered ground was soon traversed, and I came into the quiet
Everything was as it used to be, in the happy time.
The opening of the little door in the panelled wall made me start and
She was so true, she was so beautiful, she was so good,--I owed her so
And you, Agnes, I said, by and by. Tell me of yourself. You have



She smiled again, and went out at the door by which she had come.
higher.
matter for regret--for deep regret, and deep contrition, Trotwood, you
She had put her hand entreatingly on his arm, to stop him; and was very,

is, I need not say. I have always read something of her poor mothers



of the feeling with which I regarded you when I saw you first--with
No!
thinking of her, pointing upward, thought of her as pointing to that

knowledge--chiefly about nothing, and extremely difficult to answer--I
The girls had gone home, when my name burst into bloom on Traddless
fire.
this hand from a pattern; and that she could throw off--I forget how
fellow. I believe you make yourselves, and each other, two of the
on, and stretched his feet enjoyingly upon the fender.
afford it; and really we go away as if we had got them! Then, when we
I, that would be pleasant and amiable. And by the way, I said aloud,

that question. Perhaps he voted for somebody, or lent money to somebody,
I dont object, said Traddles.
similar practical satires would have been but scanty. We arranged the
busier sort of magistrates, and some visitors they had brought. He
our inspection. It being then just dinner-time, we went, first into the
Mr. Creakle and his friends what were supposed to be the main advantages
as I could.

it, reported to us, in a state of the greatest admiration, that he was
This recognition caused a general admiration in the party. I rather
Far more comfortable here, than ever I was outside. I see my follies,
us, as if he felt himself the principal object of merit in a highly
a great adulteration of milk, in London, and that the article in a pure
encouragement.
hope he may repent of all the wickedness and sin to which he has been a

Now, Twenty Seven, said Mr. Creakle, entering on a clear stage with
the voice. I should wish mother to be got into my state. I never should

was violent--you was violent to me yourself, Mr. Copperfield. Once, you
best for you. I pity all who aint brought here!

to these Immaculates, by Creakle and the rest; Twenty Eight (also
him walking along the street--picked him out with her sharp eye in a
would!
Perhaps its a good thing, Traddles, said I, to have an unsound Hobby

what a fate mine might have been--but only thought so, as I had thought

pain--began to oppress me heavily. If that were so, my sacrifice was

hours here! I never thought, when I used to read books, what work it was
I think I do, Trot.

the whitened slopes and sweeps of Down-land lying against the dark sky,

Do you doubt my being what I always have been to you?
lips than yours, Agnes, which seems strange--that there is someone upon


You have not taught me quite in vain. There is no alloy of self in what
Agnes! Stay! A moment!
and I saw my hope brighten in them.
Yes! she cried, earnestly. I am glad to know it!
knowledge of myself and of her; how I had resigned myself to what that
She laid her gentle hands upon my shoulders, and looked calmly in my
began to shine while we were lingering on, and looking up to them, we
Goodness me! said my aunt, peering through the dusk, whos this

through her spectacles, immediately went into hysterics, for the first

She did.
though we were so happy.
playing in the room, when I was told that a stranger wished to see me.
Let him come in here! said I.
naturally on my ear! Masr Davy, tis a joyful hour as I see you, once

Are you going back those many thousand miles, so soon? asked Agnes.
Our fortuns, Masr Davy, he rejoined, is soon told. We havent fared
me lost sight of Masr Davy, that theer shining sundown--was that low,
mind which), and of course we took him in, and giv him to eat and drink,
Emly now, Masr Davy, whether youd know her!
gone for ever. Cheerful along with me; retired when others is by;
offers fur to take her fur his wife (wives is very scarce theer), and
fairer than that!
Mr. Peggotty burst into a great roar of laughter, and Agnes and I both
well. But what is the latest news of him?
amost thowt it would have melted away. And now hes a Magistrate.
deservedly esteemed, so highly talented, and so widely popular. Doctor
to endeavour to follow our distinguished townsman through the
conclusion of the proceedings the tables were cleared as if by art-magic



there was an advertisement of a collection of similar letters by him, to


when I wondered why the birds didnt peck her in preference to apples,
stories; and to be reminded by it of my old acquaintance Brooks of

dead! Rosa kneeling at her feet, by turns caresses her, and quarrels
who is a sort of yellow bear with a tanned hide. Julia is steeped in
And lo, the Doctor, always our good friend, labouring at his Dictionary

at heart. Theres the Reverend Horace promoted to that living at four
Traddless house is one of the very houses--or it easily may have
large table like a Patriarch; and Sophy beams upon him, from the head,
indeed; so may I, when realities are melting from me, like the shadows

was helped by the speakers square wall of a forehead, which had his

anything over.  Thomas Gradgrind, sirperemptorily ThomasThomas

Call yourself Cecilia.

the general behoof of all the little pitchers.  Girl number twenty
rays appeared to draw out of him what little colour he ever possessed.
Now girl number twenty, said Mr. Gradgrind.  You know what a horse
To continue in fistic phraseology, he had a genius for coming up to the
Upon which the other half, seeing in the gentlemans face that Yes was
Ill explain to you, then, said the gentleman, after another and a
room.  Would you use a carpet having a representation of flowers upon


You must use, said the gentleman, for all these purposes, combinations
So, Mr. MChoakumchild began in his best manner.  He and some one hundred
boundaries and bearings on the two and thirty points of the compass.  Ah,

forbid!  I only use the word to express a monster in a lecturing castle,
ruminating quadruped with several stomachs.
total of twelve in the other wing; four-and-twenty carried over to the
more than this, what was it for good gracious goodness sake, that the
was neither town nor country, and yet was either spoiled, when his ears
thus forming a fountain of solid iron in mid-air, a feat never before
place.


that you, with your education and resources, should have brought your
I was tired, father.  I have been tired a long time, said Louisa.
What, he repeated presently, would Mr. Bounderby say?  All the way to
relationship towards another man perfectly devoid of sentiment.  So near
looked older; his seven or eight and forty might have had the seven or
thing by name.  I passed the day in a ditch, and the night in a pigsty.
else, I believe, that was capable of inflammation, returned Mr.


me out a rope.  Vagabond, errand-boy, vagabond, labourer, porter, clerk,

And, Mrs. Gradgrind, said her husband in a lofty manner, I should as
lectures about circuses.  What can you possibly want to know of circuses
position, had been influenced by two reasons.  Firstly, she was most
education of the reason of my family.  The reason is (as you know) the
Ill tell you in what.  In idle imagination.
have got into the house?  Because, in minds that have been practically
now.  She specially applied here at the house to be admitted, as not
Gradgrind wanted girls to come, and how was it possible to contradict
Not the least in the world, said Mr. Bounderby, as long as you do it
room devoted to hair-cutting.  Louisa languidly leaned upon the window
Always my pet; aint you, Louisa? said Mr. Bounderby.  Good-bye,
CHAPTER V
dye, and vast piles of building full of windows where there was a
bear to hear the place mentioned.  The rest of its features were
everywhere in the material aspect of the town; fact, fact, fact,
streets on a Sunday morning, and note how few of _them_ the barbarous
Then came the experienced chaplain of the jail, with more tabular
never thankful for it, gentlemen; that they were restless, gentlemen;
existence of the Coketown working-people had been for scores of years,
Mr. Bounderby knew it was somewhere down town, but knew no more

No, I wasnt, sir! cried Bitzer.  Not till she run away from me.  But

carrying?
that her pursuer was gone.  They bruise themselves very bad sometimes.
for a reassuring tone, as they turned down a narrow road, And this is
metallic laugh.  Pretty well this, for a self-made man!
    Walk in, and theyll draw it here;

from one to another in quest of her father; and presently they heard
in with his hands in his pockets.  His face, close-shaven, thin, and
crown of his head, heels upwards, in the palm of his fathers hand,


Offered at the Garters four times last night, and never done em once,

There!  Get out, get out! said Mr. Childers, thrusting his young friend
Do you mean that he has deserted his daughter?

hear it.
am telling your friend whats the fact; if you dont like to hear it, you
Jupe sent his daughter out on an errand not an hour ago, and then was

Harry!  Nor I!
pleased as Punch.  I couldnt altogether make out why, myself, as we were
walk, to the landing outside the door, and there stood stroking his face,
families was in the habit of balancing the father of another of the
any kind of sharp practice, and an untiring readiness to help and pity
He addressed Mr. Gradgrind, who answered Yes.
out, Thquire, no more than mine.
to be drawn to the grave by the two piebald poniescried, Father, hush!
out as if she were trying to stop his departing shadow and embrace it,
Bounderby.

At the thame time, said Sleary, I mutht put in my word, Thquire, tho

When father comes back, cried the girl, bursting into tears again after
Well known, assented Mr. Sleary, rolling his loose eye.  Youre one of
daughter Josephines performance.  He wanted nothing but his whip.
have harboured matrimonial views, and who moodily withdrew.  Mr. Sleary
Mr. Gradgrind as to a horse.
back.  He had never thought of going away, when he sent me for it.  I

Bully of humility inside.

herself, went out at a salary.  And here she was now, in her elderly
which she is pleased to term handsome), keeping the house of Josiah
    Princes and lords may flourish or may fade,
The girl is now waiting to know, said Mrs. Sparsit, whether she is to
black eyebrows contracted as she took a sip of tea.
You are quite another father to Louisa, sir.  Mrs. Sparsit took a
enough of it, first and last!  Hed open his eyes, that boy would, if he
Egad, maam, so was I, said Bounderby, with the wrong side of it.  A
Well, maam, said her patron, perhaps some people may be pleased to
It is true, sir, returned Mrs. Sparsit, with an affectation of humility

here.
eyes upon the ground, while he proceeded thus:
reclaimed and formed.  You have been in the habit now of reading to your
It was only now when her sorrow broke out, that Louisa looked at her.

When she was half a dozen years younger, Louisa had been overheard to
more.  These portentous infants being alarming creatures to stalk about
which it was the duty of these babies to be smuggled and inveigled.  But,
seemed to be on the whole more comforted by Goldsmith than by Cocker.

Not me, I hope, Tom?
awhile, as I get older, and nearer growing up, I often sit wondering
unfortunate for both of us.
gunpowder under them, and blow them all up together!  However, when I go
Their shadows were defined upon the wall, but those of the high presses
about, or nothing will.
reading what she asked in the fire, and it was not quite plainly written
Yes, Tom.
I have such unmanageable thoughts, returned his sister, that they
impossible that you could have done it.
could drive a poor invalid distracted, to hear you talking in this absurd
hard, and life in general was opened to her as such a closely ruled
pity.  Yet, what was to be done?  MChoakumchild reported that she had a
that it showed the necessity of infinite grinding at the mill of

But, if you please, Miss Louisa, Sissy pleaded, I amO so stupid!
Tell me some of your mistakes.
prosperous nation?  Girl number twenty, isnt this a prosperous nation,
in it there are a million of inhabitants, and only five-and-twenty are
another of my mistakesof accidents upon the sea.  And I find (Mr.
Louisa stood looking at the pretty modest head, as it drooped abashed
Though its plain to _me_.


different from him.  I used to read to him to cheer his courage, and he
Always, always! returned Sissy, clasping her hands.  Kinder and kinder
and the dog was bloody, and father lay down crying on the floor with the
And when I came to stoop down and look up at his face, I saw that he was

kissing me again, he let me go.  When I had gone down-stairs, I turned
keep his word.
principles the baselessness of these fantastic hopes.  Yet it did seem
appears as if I never was to hear the last of anything!

Stephen Blackpool, forty years of age.
broken intervals of leisure through many years, had mastered difficult

him who was there.  Making his pace at once much quicker and much softer,

his arm a moment as if to thank him for it.

Always a muddle? said Rachael, with another gentle touch upon his arm,

night, as he went on.
clean.
but so much fouler than that in her moral infamy, that it was a shameful
Yes, back.  Why not?
upon the bed heavily, and soon was snoring hard.  He sunk into a chair,

the composed faces and the regulated actions.  There is no mystery in it;

sight), at lunch on chop and sherry.  Mrs. Sparsit netting at the
unreasonable ones.  You dont expect to be set up in a coach and six, and
Stephen happened to glance towards Mrs. Sparsit.  I can go, Mr.
Sir, I hope I never had nowt to say, not fitten for a born lady to year,

From bad to worse, from worse to worsen.  She left me.  She disgraced
home.  There she lay upon my har-stone!  There she is!
However, its too late to say that.
more sherry.
t so long, for that I ha hadn the pity and comforting words o th
wont do, they ha gowd an other cash, an they can say This for yo
If I marry toother dear lass, theres a law to punish me?

attention, gave a nod.

your piece-work.  You didnt take your wife for fast and for loose; but
listening to some mischievous stranger or othertheyre always aboutand

love and patience could abate the raging of the seayet it was a womans

woman before, and had not quite liked her.
She walked along at his side, and, gently accommodating himself to her
savings so, once every year.  I come regular, to tramp about the streets,
With a large allowance for difference of tastes, and with all submission
He knew that there was trouble enough in the world; and if the old woman

simplicity, surrounded her, he did not know, but even in this fantastic
the arches near: little felt amid the jarring of the machinery, and
had said as to wait for her again.  He waited, but she had eluded him.
of the lightness then in his now heavy-laden breast; of the then restored

added to his other thoughts the stern reflection, that of all the
of his mind.  She sat by the bed, watching and tending his wife.  That is
I am glad you have come at last, Stephen.  You are very late.




His eyes fell again on the bottle, and a tremble passed over him, causing
No!  Dont, please; dont.  Let me see thee setten by the bed.  Let me
And now I shall keep silence, for I want thee to sleep.
one line in the table of commandments at the altar, and illuminated the
he knew, he was unable to consider; but he was back in those places by
The wind was blowing again, the rain was beating on the house-tops, and
Her eyes returned to that corner, and she put her hand over them as a
on them.  Presently, she resumed her staring round the room.  And now,
moment and she would be past all help, let the whole world wake and come
awake.  She held the cup in her hand even now.
No, Stephen.  Tis but a minute, and Im home.
fell again, in all their gentleness and mildness, on his face.
How can _I_ say what I might ha done to myseln, or her, or both!
He kissed the border of her shawl again, and let her go.  She bade him

Time passed Thomas on in the mill, while his father was thinking about
I fear, Jupe, said Mr. Gradgrind, that your continuance at the school



nothing; yet he was not sure that if he had been required, for example,
gentlemen, dumb honourable gentlemen, blind honourable gentlemen, lame
night, when he was going out, and Louisa came to bid him good-bye before
Your hands are rather cold, Louisa.  Are you not well?
quite a young gentleman of pleasure now, and not quite a prepossessing
Ah!  Thats what I mean, said Tom.  Do you know where he is

though I supposed youd most likely guess, even if you didnt know.  I
that greatest and longest-established Spinner of all, would weave from
exact totals, and finally settledif those concerned could only have been


father.
you will take it into your favourable consideration.
Father, she still pursued, does Mr. Bounderby ask me to love him?
Therefore, perhaps the expression itselfI merely suggest this to you, my
contrary, there is a great suitability.  Then the question arises, Is
What do you recommend, father, asked Louisa, her reserved composure not
belong to many young women.
between himself and all those subtle essences of humanity which will



hand.  But, her repetition of these words seemed to strike with some

careful of me, that I never had a childs heart.  You have trained me so
in your early youth, be (if I may so express myself) almost any age.
soon as you are married, which was the case with mine, I cannot consider
and never giving him a name.  I cannot call him Josiah, for the name is
When Mr. Gradgrind had presented Mrs. Bounderby, Sissy had suddenly
might be.  Whether she would instantly depart, bag and baggage, to Lady
coming direct from the pantry.
purpose, in a piece of cambric.  An operation which, taken in connexion
Mrs. Sparsit, maam, said Mr. Bounderby, I am going to astonish you.


always substitute the phrase, annual compliment.

be all you desire, and deserve!
aspect.  Dresses were made, jewellery was made, cakes and gloves were
matrimony, they went home to breakfast at Stone Lodge aforesaid.
know what I am, and what my extraction was, you wont expect a speech
the same timenot to deceive youI believe I am worthy of her.  So, I
What a game girl you are, to be such a first-rate sister, Loo!

its own, which appeared impervious to the suns rays.  You only knew the
ruined, when they were required to send labouring children to school;
pitched their property into the Atlantic yet, but, on the contrary, had
elephants more mad or more sane.  Their wearisome heads went up and down
dip of an oar stirred up vile smells.  But the sun itself, however
released him from her determined pity a moment.
Sparsit considered herself, in some sort, the Bank Fairy.  The
pens, fragments of wafers, and scraps of paper torn so small, that
time, and ought to have fallen long ago; but she had kept her life, and


dignity, my lot having been signally cast in a widely different sphere;
Has it been a busy day, Bitzer? asked Mrs. Sparsit.
extremely clear-headed, cautious, prudent young man, who was safe to rise
by philosophers that in this is comprised the whole duty of mannot a
being used, and theyre always best avoided.

extravagant idler.  He is not worth his salt, maam.  He wouldnt get it
Yes, Bitzer, said Mrs. Sparsit.  I have always pitied the delusion,
maam?  What one person can do, another can do.
first consideration of a rational creature, and its what they pretend to
the person I most like to feed.
across as if he was going to knock.  That _is_ his knock, maam, no
Bounderby, and I will never shrink from it.  If to see him is any part of

Humph! thought Mrs. Sparsit, as she made a stately bend.  Five and
way.

I am the bearer of a letter of introduction to Mr. Bounderby, the banker.
Thank you.  I had no intention of delivering my letter at the present
stranger, whose lightness and smoothness of speech were pleasant
him, I have known him ten years.
her such a portentously hard-headed reputation, that I have a burning
assure you, Mrs. Powler, he then said, much exhausted, that the

when darkness seemed to rise slowly out of the ground, and creep upward,

imitation of them; and they yaw-yawed in their speech like them; and they
and among the scattered articles unowned, a widows cap.  And the
ready to go in for statistics as for anything else.  So, he went in.
disconsolate, that he was already half-disposed to go in for something
Dont be too sure of that, said Bounderby.  I dont promise it.  First
its the lightest work there is, and its the best-paid work there is.
Why, you see, replied Mr. Bounderby, it suits my disposition to have a
proud as you are.  I am just as proud as you are.  Having now asserted my
They went out without further discourse; and Mr. Bounderby piloted the
yet awhile to comprehend this girl, for she baffled all penetration.
long, I believe we shall at least hear of him in connexion with one of
different from mine; mine was a real thing, by George!  Youre a
the world, and thought, Now, how am I to take this?

manner: a manner to which she might attach as much or as little meaning
here with a project for postponing the family dinner till half-past six,
a languid manner, received with charming! every now and then; and they
her handa pretty little soft hand; and her fingers closed upon her
Never mind that now, said Bounderby.
young fellow, and ungracious in his manner even to her.  So much the

young gentleman whose imagination had been strangled in his cradle,
took an observation of his friend.  He dont seem to care about his
Mr. James Harthouse smiled; and rising from his end of the sofa, and
that Tom was uncommonly pleased with himself.
smoking his cigar in his own easy way, and looking pleasantly at the
third person singular, she does not care, returned Tom.
length, and, reclining with the back of his head on the end of the sofa,
on.
thing in her.
system.

found an ancient lady there, who seems to entertain great admiration for
came upon him, followed by complete oblivion.  He was roused from the
easily, though not yet free from an impression of the presence and

and what other froth and fume he had in him.  He had declaimed himself
his features crushed into an habitually sour expression, he contrasted
visible for one moment there.  That every man felt his condition to be,
nothing.
whatever they may bewhat, I ask you, will you say of that working-man,

stood quiet, with his left hand at his chin, waiting to be heard.  There
whats been spokn o me, and tis lickly that I shant mend it.  But Id
in wi th rest.  But I ha my reasonsmine, yo seefor being hindered;

know weel that yo aw resolve to ha nommore ado wi a man who is not wi
I ha thowt on t, above a bit, sir.  I simply canna coom in.  I mun go
remembered something he had not said, and returned again.
slight rustle of men moving a little apart, all along the centre of the
to hurl out traitors from the tents they had pitched in a sacred and a
to be Stephens now, in every waking moment of his life; at his work, on
began to be appalled by the prospect before him.  Not only did he see no


It was into the drawing-room that he was thus bidden.  A tea-table was
deserter he had been called.
strangers who are always aboutand who ought to be hanged wherever they
deceive me.  You want to tell us so.  Why dont you?
How t happens?
with it, said Bounderby, still in confidence with the wall.  If only
after glancing at her face.  Not rebels, nor yet rascals.  Nowt o th
fectionate to one another, een to death.  Be poor amoong em, be sick
wi us.
beforehand, what it will be; nobody knows better than I do, take

ever we were born.  Look how this ha growen an growen, sir, bigger an
indict the blackguards for felony, and get em shipped off to penal
troubles made, sir.  Tis not wi _them_ t commences.  I ha no favour
Sir, I canna, wi my little learning an my common way, tell the
aw, rating em as so much Power, and reglatin em as if they was figures
I were not up to t myseln, sir; I do assure yo.
Stephen raised his eyes quickly to his face.

Ah, Rachael, my dear!  Missus, thou wi her!
go back Parliamentary, at six in the morning.  Well, but what has this to
knew it to be to Rachael, he pursued the subject that interested her in



Rachael will coom then; and arterwards Ill see thee safe t thy
fresh, and the sugar lump, of coursein fulfilment of the standard
Oh, many long years!  Mrs. Peglers husband (one of the best on record)
had a son, she said, curiously distressed, and not by any of the usual
reassure her; and not seeming to know what she was about.
quite unable to give him; took the candle, went downstairs, and in a few
beetles.  But she knew from her reading infinitely more of the ways of

question that would give pain to any one here.  If I should ask any other

He fell into suspicion, said Louisa, with his fellow-weavers,
respect, I bear to Rachael, or wi what cause.  When I passed that
Afoot, my kind ledy, afoot.
moment, and now stood with his hand before his face.  She stretched out
Chesterfield could not have taught his son in a century.

T days Monday, replied Stephen, considering.  Why, sir, Friday or
or a message for you, but not else.  Now look here!  You are sure you
room, or wait to be lighted down the narrow stairs.  He was at the bottom
They walked back together to the corner of the street where Rachael
Tis not for that, Stephen, that I mind.  But thou knowst our old
than me, shouldst be beside it.  Thourt beside it now.  Thou makst me
the second day, he saw land; at the end of the third, his loom stood
nothing.
passing first the fanlight of the door, and afterwards the two staircase
The town was as entirely deserted as if the inhabitants had abandoned it,
for the morning work.  Domestic fires were not yet lighted, and the high
CHAPTER VII
themselves.  The only difference between us and the professors of virtue
disposition to believe in a wider and nobler humanity than she had ever
no particular design or plan before him: no energetic wickedness ruffled
Mr. James Harthouse began to think it would be a new sensation, if the
neighbourhood of Mr. Bounderbys retreat, there mellowed into a rustic
Why, sir, he would say to a visitor, I am told that Nickits, the late
place for a dozen horses; and unless Nickits is belied, he kept the full
fifth floor, up a narrow dark back street in Antwerp.
He sat down beside her, with a glance at her face.


She had made the slightest action possible, as if she would have risen in
whole answer, she added, I know he does.
again, for his sake?  Is that necessary?
meaning, I am sureand his highly esteemed brother-in-law.

on the faith of the interest you profess for him, I will not do so by
respect both for Mr. Gradgrind and for Mr. Bounderby, I think I perceive

not being more sensible in every word, look, and act of his life, of the
and advice in extricating themrather valuable, I hope, as coming from a
He assisted her to rise, and she took his arm, and they advanced to meet
the bark, Tom.



exceedingly observant look at him, his companion relapsed into his
Harthouse took him persuasively by the coat.
it unnatural conduct.
Mr. Harthouse, as a thoroughly well-bred man, accustomed to the best

Now, you see, Tom, said Mr. Harthouse in conclusion, himself tossing
Having made which bargain, Tom, said Harthouse, clapping him on the
thought James Harthouse, reversing the reflection of his first days
idle winner might count his gains.  He was not at all bored for the time,
than indifferent and purposeless.  It is the drifting icebergs setting

Harthouse! cried Mr. Bounderby.  Have you heard?

circumstance.  I am surprised you dont see it.
Mr. Bounderby, with sundry menacing nods and shakes of his head.  It

young fellow sleeps outside of, there was never mind how much.  In the
Mr. Bounderbys moral abstinence.
his moral character.  Far from it.  I have always considered Bitzer a
money gone.


and floor the Established Church?  Mrs. Sparsit, in point of high

Bitzers attention to him, and their both taking notice of himAnd to its
on going off duty, and be damned to her.
Louisas parasol from her hand, and had put it up for her; and she walked
night on the mangle in the laundry.  True, the Powlers and the Scadgerses
extent in the testimony he had borne to her nerves, occasionally sat back
to it some three or four score times in the course of the evening.  Her
When candles were brought, Mrs. Sparsit murmured, Dont be low, sir.
stillness, though not what they said.  Mrs. Sparsit, from her place at
If Miss Gradgrind will permit me, I will offer to make it for you, as I
past midnight; but in the country silence, which did anything but calm
nothing to him.

Whisper very softly.  Say only yes, and I shall understand you!
You have been so hurried and disturbed to-day.  Have any fresh
He was very quick upon her with this retort.




mittens (they were constructed of a cool fabric like a meat-safe), or of

I have had the honour, by a coincidence of which I am proud, to have
talent forin fact for anything requiring accuracywith a combination of

Miss Gradgrind will soon be here to preside at the table, Mr. Bounderby
knew it of old to be so essential that he should breakfast to the moment,
Of course.  It is of no moment.  Why should it be of any importance to
side-winds.
meaning.  What does it matter?
minutes after he had left the house in the self-same hat, the same

inducements to go back, and had rarely gone.
it a beneficent god, deferring to gods as great as itself; not a grim
There was great trouble before it could be made known to Mrs. Gradgrind
called him J; and that she could not at present depart from that

of this approach.

long left off saying anything.
But there is somethingnot an Ology at allthat your father has missed,
himself in vain, took upon her the dread solemnity of the sages and
of the Bank, Mrs. Sparsit was a pattern of consistency; continuing to
which Mrs. Sparsit returned, in effect, though not of the Mahomedan
turning back.  If she had once turned back, it might have been the death
Very true, sir, said Mrs. Sparsit, shaking her head.
No, maam, continued Bounderby, I have not heard anything more about
villainous old mind.  In the mean time, maam, I am of opinion, if you
You recollect the man, Mr. Harthouse?

profession of morality, except among our people; it really is that
so lightened in my heart by what you say.

hopes.  Hushed in expectancy, she kept her wary gaze upon the stairs; and
promptitude to the national cinder-heap, and resumed his sifting for the
Art or nature though, the original stock of Louisas character or the
Pray, sir, returned Mrs. Sparsit, reproachfully, let me beg you not to

his journey, and the Bank was closing, present my compliments to young
for being so uncommunicative.
Mr. Harthouse is a great favourite of mine, said Mrs. Sparsit, as
your sister, Mr. Tom, if I was to charge you with one?

stopping in the street and looking up it and down it, and lifting his hat
into the train, that she was borne along the arches spanning the land of
crossing and recrossing her, and the reek of her own tread in the thick
Hark!
must have passed through the neighbouring fields; for his horse was tied
manner of speaking was not hurried.
manner, is heart-rending.
Your cruel commands are implicitly to be obeyed; though I am the most
commanded it, or any fate, or every fate, all was alike to him, so that
Sparsit, you little think how well attended you are!
struck into a side-path parallel with the ride.  Mrs. Sparsit followed in
she followed up the railroad steps, and paid her money in the small
exulted hugely.  The figure had plunged down the precipice, and she felt
But, Mrs. Sparsit was wrong in her calculation.  Louisa got into no

that some of the tall chimneys might be struck by lightning.
uncovered her head, and letting her cloak and hood fall where they might,
Curse the hour?
difficulty he answered, Yes, Louisa.
affections, weaknesses capable of being cherished into strength, defying
O no, no.  No, Louisa.
and figures, and definitions were not quite absolute; I have grown up,
proposed my husband to me.  I took him.  I never made a pretence to him
ever rule or state for me, father, until they shall be able to direct the
conveying to me almost immediately, though I dont know how or by what

not know that I am ashamed, I do not know that I am degraded in my own

sight, the events became more real to her mind.

doing.
how she was, and dwelling on the necessity of her keeping very quiet
still does seem, impossible to question, has given way in an instant.  I

again on what has so painfully passed between us.  When I consider your
future.  To speak unreservedly to you, I do.  I am far from feeling
supposed so; but, as I have said, I mistrust myself now.  I have supposed
associations begun, in her case, at an early age.  I ask youignorantly

strongest qualities she possessed, long turned upon themselves, became a


I hope not, for I have always loved you, and have always wished that you
First, Sissy, do you know what I am?  I am so proud and so hardened, so


After putting his horse at Coketown through the storm, as if it were a
Who could have been reduced to sudden extremity for the company of that

Cursing these quick retorts of the young gentleman to whom he was so true
the present state of affairsIll dine, said Mr. James Harthouse.
five shillings, and throw him.  At another time it occurred to him, Or

Outside this door, sir.
To Mr. Harthouse.  He added in his mind, And you speak to him with the
eyes.  He thought besides, This is a very odd beginning.  I dont see

earnest quiet holding to the object with which she had come; all this,
The drowning man catches at the straw.  With no disrespect for your
James Harthouse looked at her with an incredulous smile upon his lips;
Harthouse, I think you had that trust too!
evil intentions, but have glided on from one step to another with a
contemplate the possibility (however unexpected) of my seeing the lady no
Mr. Harthouse, returned Sissy, with a blending of gentleness and
irresolution, or had harboured for the best purpose any reserve or

presently, and leaning against the chimney-piece, it could only be in
Sissy rose.  She was not surprised by the result, but she was happy in
Pardon my curiosity at parting.  Related to the family?
upon the instant, and wrote the following note (in appropriate
Tell him to get up, and pack up.
things, would say at his expense if they knew itso oppressed him, that
sweeping in upon him at his hotel in St. Jamess Street, exploded the
on her arrival at her journeys end; but considered in any other light,
time for letters.  No man shall talk to Josiah Bounderby of Coketown
Bounderby, unable to bear it, seized her by the arm and shook her.

ran from town to this house, through a raging storm, and presented
of my doing more than taking refuge in tears.  (Which she did.)
speak to me, he resumed, here I am.  But, I am not in a very agreeable
dear.  That, to start with.  When I begin to be dear to a man, I
connecting him with mine.
have found it out at last, have you?  Education!  Ill tell you what

Gradgrind, shading his face with his hand, has always been my favourite
his hands in his pockets, that you are of opinion that theres what
me anything about imaginative qualities, I always tell that man, whoever
an incompatibility of some sort or another, I am given to understand by
of not having a shoe.  Yet you may believe or not, as you think proper,
astonished to see the way in which your daughter has conducted herself,
By your visiting proposition, said Bounderby, with an inflexible jerk
asking too much, Bounderby, that you, so far her elder, should aid in

Tom Gradgrind, and she had her bringing-up; and the two horses wouldnt

a remarkable man, and a self-made man, and a commercial wonder more
Things having come to this pass, and showing no latent signs of stirring
eyes assembled, were the eyes of those who could not read.  These people,
there, when Slackbridge unfolded what he called that damning document,
race that happily has cast him out for ever!  Yes, my compatriots,
of the Coketown operative!  Therefore, my band of brothers in a sacred
Slackbridge, and gave three cheers for him, as he sat demonstratively
They want to see you.  Rachael has been crying, and seems angry.


I felt compassion for him, said Louisa, her colour deepening, and I

seemed to take so pitifully to him; but I dont know now, I dont know!

to-night, I hastened to hear what was said of Stephenfor I know wi
Then, Ill tell you something.  You are not aware perhaps, retorted Mr.
changes his name, does he!  Thats rather unlucky, too, for such an
You need have no fear of that, young lady.  He is sure!
to be true, and I have given you the means of proving it to be true, and
any one; but when I am so mistrustedwhen we all areI cannot keep such
whether she might come to-morrow night, to inquire if there were news of





this place, who have any trust in the poor dear lad now.
certain, Rachael, that the confidence you hold in yours against all
comfort me, and keep me company, and be seen wi me when I am not yet
by his coming back of his own accord, and showing himself innocent before
of this before bed-time.  Ill walk home wi you.
Let us hope that to-morrow will bring something better, Rachael.  Come
time to stand by Stephen.  To-morrow is Saturday.  If no news comes
ecstasy of excitement, struggling to open the door; Mrs. Sparsit seeing
The spectacle of a matron of classical deportment, seizing an ancient

more astonished than hospitable, at sight of this uninvited party in his

down stiffly in a chair, as if she were frozen; and with a fixed stare at
stir in such aMrs. Pegler glanced timidly but proudly round the
I am surprised, madam, he observed with severity, that in your old age

mother, too, could pinch a bit, as it was her duty and her pleasure and
suspicions.  And I never stood here before, nor never wanted to stand
whether theyre satisfied or not, perhaps theyll be so good as to
he had advanced the mean claim (there is no meaner) to tack himself on to
As to the whelp; throughout this scene as on all other late occasions, he
interchange of looks when the unconscious father rested his gray head on
CHAPTER VI
between the town and Mr. Bounderbys retreat.

As Sissy said it, her eyes were attracted by another of those rotten
O the poor lad, the poor lad!  He has been made away with.  He is lying
black ragged chasm hidden by the thick grass.  They sprang back, and fell


Quickening herself by carrying such entreaties in her thoughts, she ran
message to Louisa, which she wrote and gave him.  By this time a whole
Every sound of insects in the air, every stirring of the leaves, every
Sissy and Rachael were at first permitted within this ring; but, later in

sobered man was brought up and leaped out briskly on the grass.  There
The consultation ended in the men returning to the windlass, and the
mass of crumbled rubbish with which the pit was half choked up, and that

the heartand tenderly supporting between them, slung and tied within,
the sky, he smiled and said, Rachael.  She stooped down on the grass at


ever knowd me at awhe wouldn ha tookn offence wi me.  He wouldn
as onjust t her as oothers was t me.  But in our judgments, like as in
You ha a father.  Will yo tak a message to him?
charges: I leave none ahint me: not a single word.  I ha seen an spokn



the duty of vindicating Stephen Blackpools memory, and declaring the
when in this life he wanted nothingbut Facts.  Before he left the room,

brother in the same dark view as mine.
truth, how is he to be found by us, and only by us?  Ten thousand pounds
more then, and said, Where can I go?  I have very little money, and I
Bounderby himself, in a bullying vein of public zeal, might play a Roman
course, encouraged by not seeing any face they knew.
between the two places was by a hilly turnpike-road, and the travelling

recreation of that monarch to do.  Sissy, though well acquainted with his
observations in the calmest way, and with his eye on the house) about two
brandy and water at hand, it doth me good to thee you.  You wath alwayth
em ath hith wardth, upon a horthethemthelvth both a goin a
jaws by daylight), and the Little Wonder of Scholastic Equitation, and in

thereth my Clown with a thauthepan-lid and a thpit, for Jackth
Louisa uttered an exclamation, partly of distress, partly of
Mr. Gradgrind arrived within an hour afterwards.  He too had encountered
Your thervant, Thquire, was his cautious salutation as they passed in.
daubed all over it; anything so grimly, detestably, ridiculously shameful

help laws?  You have comforted others with such things, father.  Comfort
thing.

delicately retired.
After all your love! he returned, obdurately.  Pretty love!  Leaving
For, there was Bitzer, out of breath, his thin lips parted, his thin

with the facts established by Harvey relating to the circulation of the

If this is solely a question of self-interest with you Mr. Gradgrind
propose that alternative, I have gone over the calculations in my mind;

Pray dont do that, said he, its of no use doing that: it only
However, thith young man having made it known to be a robbery of a bank,

The word was so sharp, that in ten minutes Mr. Childers, sauntering about
thith time.  Childerth took him off, an hour and a half after we left
a thet of bellth for the horthe, I thould be very glad to take em.
Louisa and Sissy withdrew into an adjoining room; Mr. Sleary, stirring
whether that dog hadnt gone to another dog, and thed, You dont happen
getting up our Children in the Wood one morning, when there cometh into
unhappy?  Tho, whether her father bathely detherted her; or whether he
wayth of the dogth ith!
And I never thought before, said Mr. Sleary, putting his head in at the
accumulated with turning like a great snowball.  At last he made the
she now bestowed upon her patron.
Well, maam? retorted Mr. Bounderby.  What are you staring at?

humble roof, theres hardly opening enough for a lady of your genius in
Mr. Bounderby, very red and uncomfortable, resumed:
Bounderby of Coketownfor having stood in your light so long.

upon himself the name, Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, should for ever dine
subservient to Faith, Hope, and Charity; and no longer trying to grind
signed with her fathers name, exonerating the late Stephen Blackpool,
woman working, ever working, but content to do it, and preferring to do
childhood of the body, as knowing it to be even a more beautiful thing,

PREFACE
This seemed to me too profound a joke to be inserted in the body of
made public by a disinterested person who was professionally
There is only one other point on which I offer a word of remark. The
appearances observed in Mr. Krooks case. The next most famous

    kept a liquor-shop and was an inveterate drunkard.
Hill. Smoke lowering down from chimney-pots, making a soft black
Fog on the Essex marshes, fog on the Kentish heights. Fog creeping
time--as the gas seems to know, for it has a haggard and unwilling
On such an afternoon, if ever, the Lord High Chancellor ought to be
long matted well (but you might look in vain for truth at the bottom
madhouse and its dead in every churchyard, which has its ruined
whatever they may be, in legal court suits. These are all yawning,
purge himself of his contempt," which, being a solitary surviving
Jarndyce and Jarndyce drones on. This scarecrow of a suit has, in
out; the legion of bills in the suit have been transformed into mere
that such a thing might happen when the sky rained potatoes, he
suitors at bay, by protesting time out of mind that Mr. Chizzle,
off-hand manner never meant to go right.
the reply that slides out of Mr. Tangle.
The Chancellor rises; the bar rises; the prisoner is brought forward
Mr. Tangle on his legs again. "Begludships pardon--dead."
knows him no more. Everybody looks for him. Nobody can see him.
If all the injustice it has committed and all the misery it has
may pass from the one scene to the other, as the crow flies. Both the
its growth is sometimes unhealthy for want of air.
and the soft loppings and prunings of the woodmans axe can make no
panes, and smoke rising from the chimney, and a child, chased by a
Sir Leicester Dedlock is only a baronet, but there is no mightier
sixty-seven. He has a twist of the gout now and then and walks a
been at the centre of the fashionable intelligence and at the top of
would be rather called very pretty than handsome, but improved into
old gentleman, attorney-at-law and eke solicitor of the High Court of
parks among the growing timber and the fern, which perhaps hold fewer

so. Yet every dim little star revolving about her, from her maid to
Dedlock and the rest--"you must remember that you are not dealing

"Nothing that YOU would call anything has been done to-day," replies
settlement (humanly speaking) of everything. And he is upon the whole
Mr. Tulkinghorn takes out his papers, asks permission to place them
being priceless but small. My Lady, changing her position, sees the


these pages, for I know I am not clever. I always knew that. I can
chair, and tell her all I had noticed since we parted. I had always
herself, I thought, that the badness of other people made her frown

seemed to be some other separation between us besides that, and
dont), my comprehension is quickened when my affection is. My

it as she looked at me, and laid it on my fluttering heart. She
She checked me, however, as I was about to depart from her--so frozen
to repair the fault I had been born with (of which I confessedly felt
the same way towards Mrs. Rachael, who was a widow; and oh, towards
said in her naturally stern way of speaking, "This is Esther, sir."
John how our Saviour stooped down, writing with his finger in the


in law. Dont distress yourself! Dont weep! Dont tremble! Mrs.
known? Not of Jarndyce and Jarndyce--the--a--in itself a monument of
"Surprising!"

couldnt wonder at that, for it was mellow and full and gave great

"Now, what does our young friend say?" proceeded Mr. Kenge. "Take
of a favourite with her to make her sorry then. When she gave me one
thing in the world I had ever seen, was hanging outside in the frost


"Where, sir?"

the outside an inch thick, like fat on mutton chops. Heres a little
afterwards, and never for a long time without thinking of him and
and I got inside and were driven away.

godmothers. Nothing could be more precise, exact, and orderly than
new-comers were confided to my care. They said I was so gentle, but I
taken Miss Donnys advice in reference to the propriety of writing to
Six quiet years (I find I am saying it for the second time) I had
   directs us to inform you that he will be glad of your

when some cried, "Esther, dear, say good-bye to me here at my
then!
very often, "Esther, now you really must! This WILL NOT do!" I
Lincolns Inn."
"Oh, indeed!" said I.
of the chimney-piece.
day-time, the candles burning with a white flame, and looking raw and
to be the companion of the young lady who is now in the Chancellors
They both looked up when I came in, and I saw in the young lady, with
to me!
wig frequently came in and out, and when he did so, we could hear a

over leaves, "is Jarndyce of Bleak House."

heard his lordship say in an equally low voice and with a smile.

was when he looked at me, "a very good companion for the young lady,
"Dont you know?" I said.
"Oh!" said she. "The wards in Jarndyce! Ve-ry happy, I am sure, to
accept my blessing."

We were to pass the night, Mr. Kenge told us when we arrived in his
coffee berry--AND the natives--and the happy settlement, on the banks

Mr. Guppy said yes, they had been sent round, and a coach was waiting
"I cant say I know where it is, for I come from Winchester and am
myself for blushing at it when he had shut the door and got upon the
"Pray be careful of yourself, miss. The young Jellybys are always up
through the kitchen to catch him when he should be released. At last

We expressed our acknowledgments and sat down behind the door, where

project at present employs my whole time. It involves me in
to Africa."


Peepy as he was going out and to take him up to nurse. He looked very
I begged permission to retain him, truly saying that he was not at
that I must confess it was a little miserable, and Ada was half
very good at my table, and I would tell them the story of Little Red
the kettle on his dressing-table, and he made Ada laugh so that they
All through dinner--which was long, in consequence of such accidents
spectacles was, who dropped into a vacant chair (there was no top or
teach the natives to turn piano-forte legs and establish an export
all the evening and dictated at intervals to her eldest daughter. She
last it did, quite brightly. On my return downstairs, I felt that
"What?" asked Ada with her pretty smile.

"My dear!"
letter," Ada said--proposing the arrangement we were now to enter on

finger in the egg-cup, which contained vinegar, and smearing it over
where Ada lay.
"No doubt," said I.
Its a great shame and a great story of you if you say you didnt
"I dont want to hear you out."
better not to speak.
ragged stool to where she was kneeling, and take that, and still hold
eyes to encounter those of a dirty-faced little spectre fixed upon
they would have made midsummer sunshine dim--I was sufficiently
go out."

down Thavies Inn to warm his feet. He was agreeably surprised to see
She then walked me on very fast.
shocked too; so we are both shocked, and theres an end of it!"
a race. Thus interrupted, Miss Jellyby became silent and walked
in Jarndyce! Ve-ry happy, I am sure!"

part of the long vacation here. In contemplation. You find the long
looked to Richard for aid. As he was half amused and half curious and
STORES. In one part of the window was a picture of a red paper mill
in Kenge and Carboys office and the letters I had so long received
in, that yonder bones in a corner, piled together and picked very
"Hi, hi!" said the old man, coming to the door. "Have you anything to
shop if tother doors out of order!" we all went in, stimulated by
they call me the Lord Chancellor and call my shop Chancery. And why
beautiful that she seemed to fix the wandering attention of the
mind. I go to see my noble and learned brother pretty well every day,
offered to me. Its a very fine skin, as you may see, but I didnt

separate finger. "Yes. There was the name of Barbary, and the name of
drops; its going mad by grains. He was as near making away with
Lane); and I followed and looked in at the window, and saw him,
it by any chance!"
she had a glimpse of Lincolns Inn Hall. This seemed to have been her
greatest suavity, "by this visit from the wards in Jarndyce. And very
called our attention to a number of bird-cages hanging there, some
one but herself was present.
mind requires to be so very clear, you know! Another time, Ill tell
and full of malice. I half believe, sometimes, that she is no cat,
WILL mention it the first thing this morning."
sound of her footsteps might reveal to him what she had said.

the same curious manner, beginning at the ends and bottoms of the
He looked so disagreeable and his cat looked so wickedly at me, as if
"Quite an adventure for a morning in London!" said Richard with a
the pieces on the board gave me the headache and the heartache both
pleasantly.


scents of old hay, swinging signs, and horse troughs: trees, fields,

"Is that Mr. Jarndyces waggon?" said Richard, calling to our
   John Jarndyce
most singular expedients and evasions or would even run away. Ada
generally good, so we alighted and walked up all the hills, and liked
for a long time sympathized with our heightened expectation, was
some dogs, and a gush of light from the opened door, and the smoking
"Now, Rick!" said he. "I have a hand at liberty. A word in earnest is
face, full of change and motion; and his hair was a silvered
"She exerts herself very much for Africa, sir," I said.

"My dear Rick," said Mr. Jarndyce, poking the fire, "Ill take an
him than we could possibly have expressed in any words. He gave an
"Ha, ha! Very good indeed!" said Mr. Jarndyce with great enjoyment.
contradicted, Esther dear! You know, you know, its true!"
down steps out of one room into another, and where you come upon more
spring-lock, three dear Adas might have been lost at once. Out of
of passage, to the plain room where Mr. Jarndyce slept, all the year
courtly chairs which stood, each attended by a little page of a stool
complacent gentleman to heaven, in festoons, with some difficulty;


"And have the children looked after themselves at all, sir?" inquired
few minutes and engaged in putting my worldly goods away when a maid
"Yes," said I. "That is my name."
standing before the fire telling Richard how fond he used to be, in
usual road of years, cares, and experiences.
Skimpole having (as he added with delightful gaiety) "nothing to live
mere child in the world, but he didnt cry for the moon. He said to
from sure of), I was confused by not exactly understanding why he was
can sympathize with the objects. I can dream of them. I can lie down
"Its only you, the generous creatures, whom I envy," said Mr.
than this. I had often new temptations, afterwards, to wonder whether
really made me consider myself in that light) "but I am gay and
such a lovely young creature as that, who is a joy to all mankind, an
way. But if I had mine," glancing at the cousins, "there should be no
strange forms, not without a ghostly motion caught from the unsteady


wiping smoother and making less of with a pocket-handkerchief.
"Are you arrested for much, sir?" I inquired of Mr. Skimpole.
"Mr. Skimpole," said Richard to me, "has a delicacy in applying to my

being parties in a Chancery suit concerning (as people say) a large
"Keep your temper, my good fellow, keep your temper!" Mr. Skimpole
of helping myself, and entirely in your hands! I only ask to be free.
debt.
shortly said, "Well, then, Ill wish you a good evening, miss.
"Not a bit," said Coavinses. "I knowd if you wos missed to-day, you
"Then you didnt think, at all events," proceeded Mr. Skimpole, "to
business!" said Mr. Skimpole thoughtfully. "Thank you, my friend.
Richard and I seemed to retain the transferred impression of having
tell me? Rick, my boy, Esther, my dear, what have you been doing? Why

press me, sir, I shall know I am wrong and will tell you."
being in all such matters quite a child--

"Why, what a cods head and shoulders I am," said Mr. Jarndyce, "to


reconcile, having so little experience or practical knowledge.
Duty, my dear!" and gave my little basket of housekeeping keys such a
the Ghosts Walk. The weather is so very bad down in Lincolnshire
famous for cross-country work, turning his large eyeball to the
So the mastiff, dozing in his kennel in the court-yard with his large
their restless fits and whose doleful voices when the wind has been

her would have cause to be surprised. Weather affects Mrs. Rouncewell
till Tuesday." Mr. Rouncewell died some time before the decease of
respectable, creditable woman. He always shakes hands with her when
made steward in due season, but he took, when he was a schoolboy, to
subject. You had better get rid of your boy; you had better get him
of this life, stands leaning against the chimney-piece this very day

"Grandmother," says the young man, changing the subject, "what a very
The young man inclines his head in acknowledgment of the precepts of
and if you please, I told them so!" in quick reply to a gesture of
of him!"
lady relaxes, consents to the admission of the visitors as a favour,

consist in their never having done anything to distinguish themselves

unaccountable to me," he says, still staring at the portrait, "how
All things have an end, even houses that people take infinite pains
housekeeper, advancing. "It has never been more than a family

to say, on the side of the blessed martyr. But it IS supposed that
The housekeeper gravely nods and continues: "Partly on account of
hour began to pine away."
where I have walked. And I will walk here, though I am in my grave. I
"And disgrace, grandmother--" says Watt.


discernible in the mist, and above them the later stars still
about jams, and pickles, and preserves, and bottles, and glass, and
and then a dear little farm-yard. As to the house itself, with its
necessary for the bee to make such a merit of his tastes. If every
always supposing the drone to be willing to be on good terms with the
"Sit down, my dear," said Mr. Jarndyce. "This, you must know, is the
out, until he turned and I was reassured by seeing in his eyes what

have long disappeared from the face of the earth. Its about a will
and made a great will. In the question how the trusts under that will
law sends questions back to equity; law finds it cant do this,
He nodded gravely. "I was his heir, and this was his house, Esther.

with their eyes stoned out, without a pane of glass, without so much
excepting in the growlery here. If you consider it right to mention
"I hope, guardian," said I, "that you may not trust too much to my
(I dont mean Skimpoles) rhyme:

something to say about it; Master Somebody--a sort of ridiculous
to recover its benignant expression as it looked at mine; and he was
Richard. But of course I said nothing in reply except that I would do

him who wanted to do anything with anybody elses money. It amazed us
Jarndyce had--or had not. Their objects were as various as their
constantly polling people by tens of thousands, yet never bringing
former class, and were glad when she called one day with her five
five and threepence, to the Tockahoopo Indians. Oswald, my second
manner, but his was by far the worst. I must except, however, the
a helping hand. My boys have contributed to the African
"They attend matins with me (very prettily done) at half-past six
discussions as generally fall to the lot of few grown people. Alfred
to their ages and their little means; and then Mr. Pardiggle brings
me to rest with curious indifference.
on it, "by this time you have found me out, I dare say?"
something to that effect. I dont think we knew what it was either,
"This gives me a great advantage when I am making my rounds," said
be essential to such a work. That I had much to learn, myself, before

pensioners--who were not elected yet.
I could hardly forbear crying out. Felix, at the same time, stamped
up with mud into a little pond like a large dirt-pie. At the doors
at full length on the ground, smoking a pipe; a powerful young man
"No, my friend," said Mrs. Pardiggle, seating herself on one stool
it done, and over. I wants a end of these liberties took with my
myself? Why, Ive been drunk for three days; and Ida been drunk four

had no other on his desolate island.
Mrs. Pardiggle accordingly rose and made a little vortex in the
that when she looked at it she covered her discoloured eye with her
mothers heart that ever beat. The woman at first gazed at her in
An ugly woman, very poorly clothed, hurried in while I was glancing
is little known, excepting to themselves and God.

"Its you, young ladies, is it?" she said in a whisper. "Im
neatly dressed in some fragments of white linen; and on my
little I thought in whose unquiet bosom that handkerchief would come

most restless creatures in the world, he certainly was very fond of
another was so charming that I had great difficulty in not showing
while thinking, with your dear face for company, and to hear the wind
"So I apprehend its pretty clear," said Richard to me, "that I shall
himself or from Coavinses, and had placed the money in my hands with

"Let me see!" he would say. "I saved five pounds out of the
deeper and deeper in love, and saying nothing about it, and each
"I went to school with this fellow, Lawrence Boythorn," said Mr.
house shake."
never forgotten that I was a low boy at school and that our
face of the earth. His father must have been a most consummate
house vibrate. "What, you have not forgotten it yet! Ha, ha, ha! And

sterling quality in this laugh, and in his vigorous, healthy voice,
said, of anything on a limited scale, and firing away with those

it for you with the greatest satisfaction!" (All this time the very
in the least!"
"The fellow has brought actions against ME for trespass, and I have
"By my soul," exclaimed Mr. Boythorn, suddenly firing another volley,
the same. I write to the fellow, Mr. Lawrence Boythorn presents his
battery; I defend them and continue to assault and batter. Ha, ha,
do any homage that a plain gentleman, and no baronet with a head
Clare and Miss Summerson for the length at which I have pursued so
I saw him so often in the course of the evening, which passed very
after all, and he is so very courtly and gentle to us, and--"

and dreamed of the days when I lived in my godmothers house. I am
columns, paying money, filing receipts, and I dare say making a great
and hoped that Mr. Kenge was well, I never looked at him, but I found
and a stormy one too, I should think, for although his room was at

can require to make me comfortable--at least I--not comfortable--Im
"I dont understand what you mean," said I, wondering.
right. "If you would excuse my taking another glass of wine, miss, I
was one fifteen, and had stood at that figure for a lengthened

heart and shaking his head at me in a melancholy manner over the
regarding me, as I again strangely felt, though my eyes were not
away immediately.
"I should be pained, Mr. Guppy," said I, rising and putting my hand

put everything away, and was so composed and cheerful that I thought

new inscription in fresh paint, PEFFER AND SNAGSBY, displacing the
Peffer ever do revisit the pale glimpses of Cooks Court, which no
had mounted to the nose and temper of the patient. With whichsoever
tends to meekness and obesity. As he stands at his door in Cooks
It is, however, the possession, and the only possession except fifty
satisfaction to the parents and guardians of the prentices, who feel
privations.
sometimes worried out of house and home, and that if he had the
the country out of telling the two prentices how he HAS heard say
shrunken fragments of its greatness, lawyers lie like maggots in
with spindle-legs and dusty baize covers; presentation prints of the
staring down at his intrusion as if it meant to swoop upon him, and
the left. This train of indecision must surely be worked out now or
the subterranean regions to take tea when he looked out of his door
Master is at home, and Guster will fetch him. Guster disappears, glad
counting-house, and copying-office. Mr. Tulkinghorn sits, facing
feeling--tight, unopenable oyster of the old school!--in the wrong
the affidavit aside, and brings his right forefinger travelling down

Kings Bench Office, and the Judges Chambers, and so forth. You know
"Thinking of more important matters, I forget where you said he
Mr. Tulkinghorn? Mrs. Snagsby, sir--I shant be two minutes, my
It is quite dark now, and the gas-lamps have acquired their full
"This is where he lives, sir," says the law-stationer.
a fire. The old man rises and comes forward, with another blot-headed

"What do they say of him?"
by the chimney stand a deal table and a broken desk, a wilderness
its wick (still burning) has doubled over and left a tower of
"Hallo, my friend!" he cries again. "Hallo! Hallo!"
irresolute, makes him start and say, "Whats that?"
the shop, the old man departs. Mr. Tulkinghorn, for some new reason
"God save us!" exclaims Mr. Tulkinghorn. "He is dead!" Krook drops
"Run, Flite, run! The nearest doctor! Run!" So Mr. Krook addresses a
"About that time, I should say," observes a dark young man on the



lodger for a year and a half and lived--or didnt live--by

he interchange a word or two. Mr. Tulkinghorn says nothing, but
"I dont speak of advice," returns Mr. Tulkinghorn. "I could

little woman (which I name Mrs. Snagsby when I use that appellation)
havent found Nimrod any work yet! or Mr. Snagsby, why didnt you
"No, I cant," returns the old man with a sudden grin.
The marine-store merchant holds the light, and the law-stationer
off. There are a few dirty scraps of newspapers, all referring to
meditation.
confidential communications with the policeman and has the appearance
is heightened as the tidings spread from mouth to mouth that the
exclusion, delay, and general idiotcy exasperating the public.
child and a murder.
any one can trace than a deserted infant.
Sols Arms, shows the curiosity in his keeping to a few discreet
head is a small iron garland, the pendant handle of a bell, which
"Silence there, will you!" says the beadle. Not to the coroner,
precipitately. The beadle is very careful that two gentlemen not very
learn how the subject of their inquiry died, and learn no more about
court (which her husband is a cabinet-maker), and it has long been
his dark looks has often dreamed as she see him take a pick-axe from
Oh! Heres the boy, gentlemen!
punish him, and serve him right--and so hell tell the truth.
Now. Is there any other witness? No other witness.
That graceless creature only knows that the dead man (whom he
wretched sleeve. "Wen I see him a-layin so stritched out just now, I
strength lying in a slangular direction) as "a rummy start." The
the inquest, with recreative intervals of piano-forte accompaniment,

the whole establishment to lay her down on the stones and go to bed.
pestiferous and obscene, whence malignant diseases are communicated
boastful island together.
makes the archway clean. It does so very busily and trimly, looks in

limits and again spanned gracefully, makes a figure in the prospect
demonstrations on the part of two bare-backed horses and two centaurs
filtering (a few) through the gloomy Cathedral of Our Lady to say a
it be some leagues away, with the Gate of the Star a white speck

beg your pardon, thats not the place. He says--yes! Here I have it!
"Walk?" repeats Sir Leicester in a tone of surprise.
days, with more or less of bell-jingling and whip-cracking, and more
whose aristocratic system it effects a dismal revolution. It is the
incited by one obstinate and drowsy bird who will persist in putting
"In excellent health, Mrs. Rouncewell."
of interest. "Why, do you know how pretty you are, child?" she says,

that excellent family, above all, of my Lady, whom the whole world

joking."
burn, and not her fresh bright cheeks, for my Ladys maid is holding
almost an Englishwoman in her acquaintance with the language;
In short, it is such an admirable thing that Mademoiselle Hortense
scent, from their breaking cover at the Court of St. Jamess to their


languid and pretty. Who have found out the perpetual stoppage. Who
choice of the Crown, in the formation of a new ministry, would lie
across the table with some one else that the shipwreck of the
distinguished circle, all round, that nobody is in question but
difference, that being realities and not phantoms, there is the
flag-staff over his head, and has some leads outside on which, any

mask--and carries family secrets in every limb of his body and every
As much as to say, "Mr. Tulkinghorn, we remember your existence when
"He is obstinate," says Mr. Tulkinghorn.
point between myself and Mr. Boythorn. If I go farther, and observe

had some."
through the cold reflection of the blaze, the colder landscape
"I found him dead."
Mr. Tulkinghorn re-asserts it by another inclination of his head.
"I was about to say," resumes the lawyer with undisturbed calmness,



own hearts.
thought of that, and perhaps he was. When Mr. Jarndyce asked him what
much older and steadier people may be even changed by the
could only have gone on making them over and over again unless he had
its a toss-up."
enthusiasm. "We have got it at last. M.R.C.S.!"
told Ada and me that it was all right, and then began to talk about

Surgeons Hall for the contemplation of the whole profession in order
eye-glasses over and over, and spoke in a sonorous voice, and did

expressions, "I would submit to you that we have only to inquire into

not require an explanation beyond our present limited faculties, that
too, with great delight, and saw all the plays that were worth
with his hair straight and flat, his shirt-collar turned down, and a
having me next them and that they could never have talked together so
perseverance, all this time, not only produced him regularly at any
Badger, who had a good practice at Chelsea and attended a large
reading a little, writing poetry a little, and botanizing a little.
"Indeed?" said Mr. Jarndyce.

to the day."
"And, my dear," said Mr. Badger, "what do I always tell you? That
"I feel when I look at it," said Mr. Badger, "Thats a man I should
the professors goblet, James!"
James!) My love, your health!"
would have an inscription let into the timbers of the quarter-deck

got home, and Ada and I retired upstairs, to find Ada more silent
"Oh, no! Dont! Pray dont!" cried Ada, very much startled by the
glow of joy, and pride, and hope, that I would not help her just yet.
"And yet you never said a word about it!" cried Ada, kissing me.


and put me between them, and really seemed to have fallen in love



I saw, and do see, many reasons to make it desirable. But that was
woman than you were as boy and girl (your manhood will excuse me,
eyes up and look hopefully at the distance! Rick, the world is before

directly, though, to say that they would wait for me.

world!"
CHAPTER XIV
married; I was to live with them afterwards; I was to keep all the

are to suppose that what it gives us (when it gives us anything) is
other foundation, to build as many castles in the air as would man
called again. She was in town, but not at home, having gone to Mile
she had made some endeavours to render presentable by wiping the dirt
very pretty. She was conscious of poor little Peepy being but a
Oh, dear me! This is a very trying wind!"
"Oh, its of no use, Miss Summerson," exclaimed Miss Jellyby, "though
apologetically, "but I am quite worn out. I was directing the new
but Ma to thank for it."
family."
poor Miss Jellyby.
"No!" said Miss Jellyby, shaking her head. "Not at all likely! I know
others should take it in turns to come and stay with me, and they

There are two Mr. Turveydrops, father and son. My Mr. Turveydrop is

much agitate Ma; I am only pen and ink to HER. One great comfort is,"
Caddy went on to say with considerable hesitation and reluctance that
think well of him--at least, I am sure you couldnt possibly think
condition that Miss Jellyby and Peepy should come back with us to
daylight. Miss Jellyby informed me that the academy had been lent,
Prince Turveydrop!"

Turveydrop, in the full lustre of his deportment.
wristbands, he had everything but any touch of nature; he was not
to the fire and waving his gloves condescendingly. "Go on, my son!"
"His sons name is the same, you know," said I.

fashionable and lounging resort, to be seen at Brighton and elsewhere


He sat down beside me, taking some pains to sit on the form, I
favourable to deportment. It develops vulgarity. Perhaps I speak with
She has not many gentlemen left. We are few. I see nothing to succeed
impart. But there ARE things--" He took another pinch of snuff and

Kensington at three."

character. I felt a liking for him and a compassion for him as he put
profession, who lived and founded a reputation entirely on their
life in the dancing-school and had done nothing but teach and fag,
clean her birds, and I make her cup of coffee for her (of course she
The poor girl, trying so hard, said it from her heart, and touched
let on the second floor. It reminded Caddy to tell me as we proceeded

"Has she been very ill?" asked Mr. Jarndyce of the gentleman whom we
gently on her arm, "Miss Flite describes her illness with her usual

day--I attend it regularly, with my documents--I taxed him with it,
"I can answer for Miss Flite that they have," said I, "for she
exclaimed.
acquainted with a Jarndyce is queer, aint it, Miss Flite? Mightnt I
guardian with his elbow and looked close up into his face with his
the whole collection," said the old man, "all cooped up together, by
Miss Flite who detained us; she was as reasonable a little creature
slyness of an old white fox. If he went before, he looked back. When
"Trying to learn myself to read and write," said Krook.
suppose would teach you wrong?"
mad as yet.
that he came. Or that when they were all gone and I said to Ada,
While we were in London Mr. Jarndyce was constantly beset by the
procession of people.
missions of various sorts among this set of people, but nothing
plainly told us. When a testimonial was originated to Mr. Quale by
enough to know. What he was to my guardian, he certainly was to the
expansive intentions--if you only knew it!" And really (he said) he
You havent had the trouble of coming to ask for the little bill. You
money. You couldnt really mean the lamb without sending it in,
Ada and me. "A little too boisterous--like the sea. A little too
proposes to frank me down and back again. I suppose it will cost
the sofa that night wiping his head.
Were at a considerable disadvantage."
"The man was necessary," pursued my guardian, walking backward and
another!" We were quickly ready and went out. Mr. Skimpole went with
"Yes?" said the boy. "Well?"
of watching. Hed set upon a post at a street corner eight or ten
"Necketts children?" said she in reply to my inquiry. "Yes, Surely,
"No, sir," said I; "I am going higher up."
Mrs. Blinders got the key!"



with an air of age and steadiness that sat so strangely on the



motherly, womanly way! "And when Emmas tired, he puts her to bed.
sat quite tranquil, looking quietly at us, and did not by any
forasmuch as she did it unto the least of these--This child," he
"No, sir," returned Mrs. Blinder, "he was nothing but a follerers.

little purse. Some neighbours in the yard that had always joked and
Mr. Gridley who had been mentioned and whom we had seen on our way
"May be so, sir, may be so," returned the other, taking Tom upon his

composedly. "You may have heard my name--Jarndyce."

been already paid or not. To settle that question, my brother filing
stand, this day! Now, Mr. Jarndyce, in your suit there are thousands
the system. I mustnt go to Mr. Tulkinghorn, the solicitor in
have been in prison for contempt of court. I have been in prison for
for me, I cant undo the past, and the past drives me here!
are you?"
pleasant to see how things lazily adapted themselves to purposes.
Skimpole, himself, had sometimes repined at the existence of
There was something so captivating in his light way of touching these

line, through a course of time during and beyond which the memory of
as if he held his name and fortune on that feudal tenure. He feels
a-hunting with bow and arrow, bear witness to his greatness. Inside,
that if that sort of thing was to last--which it couldnt, for a man
by replying that he "dont know nothink." He knows that its hard to
evil in its every footprint than Lord Coodle, and Sir Thomas Doodle,
Whether "Tom" is the popular representative of the original plaintiff
language--to be, to every scrap of it, stone blind and dumb! It must
bishop, or a government, or that inestimable jewel to him (if he only

or four, cant remember where he left them, looks up and down the
their bite.
Allegory, in the person of one impossible Roman upside down, points
something exceedingly inconsistent. She should be an upper servant by
"Are you the boy Ive read of in the papers?" she asked behind her
"Come farther up."

Jo answers with a nod, having also nodded as each other place was

whisper without looking over his shoulder.

top. They was obliged to stamp upon it to git it in. I could unkiver
staring.
money from her purse. Jo silently notices how white and small her
to give it a one-sided bite at the edge as a test of its quality.
house, my dear," says Mrs. Rouncewell to Rosa. "His dressing-room is
always delightful. But though I liked him more and more the better I
I write down these opinions not because I believe that this or any
of me that I was always better than land a-head and a breeze a-starn
calling you my dears?"

parts of a charade, "I still enjoyed opportunities of observing
were formed during the lifetime of Captain Swosser and adapted to new
tiresome pursuit. Now, this is not promising. Young men like Mr.
as Captain Swosser of the Royal Navy and Professor Dingo. The
of Devon after our marriage," said Mrs. Badger, "that he disfigured
us and that there was a great probability of its being sound. We
triumphantly.

"No, but Richard," said I, "and my dear Ada! Consider how important


trusting when I first saw it in that memorable November fog, how much
cousin, I love you, so much!), but I dont settle down to constancy
through and through his hand, "I was a little hasty perhaps; or I
pursuit.
I was not by any means so sure of that, and I saw how his hankering
with Mr. Jarndyce, without a moments delay, and his disposition was
purpose in life from childhood had been that one which now held
good night. "But I should be a little so if you thought at all the
shoulders--both hands now--and looking up into his face, like the
even the silent look of confidence in me which now followed it once



"Remain a moment, Esther," said he, "You were in my thoughts."

be, "One of my earliest remembrances, guardian, is of these words:
idiosyncrasy to put that trust in me, perhaps because it was mine to
quite innocent. I felt concerned for the little creature, in her
I held his hand for a little while in mine.
it was true. I did not understand it. Not for many and many a day.

pity he should go away. Because he was distinguished in his art among

for his hospitality and for the very happy hours--he called them the

"Do they look like that sort of thing?" I repeated, pinching her
"Left behind?"

some bones and seemed to acquire a considerable fund of information
satisfaction, to take myself well to task and have a regular wind-up
the time of his going to Mr. Kenges, that he needed to have
we too could occasionally stay for a few days at a time; "but, little
us at that time of the year very well, but he was in the full novelty
mahogany to walnut, and from this shape to that, as the humour took
for them."
for a considerable period, I believe to our mutual satisfaction until
it assuredly possessed its advantages too. On the journey he had a
marketplace, and a market-cross, and one intensely sunny street, and
to be put to death!"

Arrogant is here, and I am glad to say, has been laid by the heels
cannot have the happiness of being their escort about Chesney Wold,
"Well!" said Mr. Boythorn. "I am glad of it on the whole. Its in
the little church of which he had spoken. Oh, the solemn woods over


about the place wore an aspect of maturity and abundance. The old
where, here and there high up, a disused nail and scrap of list still
which his name was attached in large letters, the following solemn
"Not in earnest!" returned Mr. Boythorn with unspeakable warmth. "Not
The congregation was extremely small and quite a rustic one with the

sight--"

which had worn into my godmothers face, like weather into rocks, was
emotion. After a long time, I looked towards Lady Dedlock again. It
did his father, and his grandfather, and his great-grandfather!"
never take trouble! I come down here, for instance, and I find a
fellow. How then?"
"I understand," said Mr. Skimpole. "Very likely he would."
This was one of many little dialogues between them which I always
delightful to me. I believe I am truly cosmopolitan. I have the
I always wondered on these occasions whether he ever thought of Mrs.
distant prospect made so radiant by its contrast with the shade in
lodge which was close at hand. We had often noticed the dark beauty
leaf there was already a freshness poured from all this seeming rage
and had come out of the gloom within. She stood behind my chair with
disputes of Sir Leicesters--they are not of his seeking, however, I
"Is the young gentleman disposed of whom you wrote to Sir Leicester

Lady Dedlock looked at me, and I looked at her and said I was indeed.
you pay some little penalty, I dare say. But none to me."
"We went our several ways," said Lady Dedlock, "and had little in
alighted from it, with some cloaks and wrappers, first the
She slightly stooped her shoulders to receive it, and the pretty girl

"Oh, no, sir!" said the keeper, who, with his wife, was looking after
as it had looked when we first saw it, it looked even more so now,

stools that will not recover their perpendicular until the current of
judicial countenance, and a strip of bark peeled by the solar rays
watering-place. The learned gentleman who weeps by the pint on the

cool, if any coolness were worth purchasing at such a price in
Street, is sensible of the influence not only in his mind as a
it, "in the ministry." Mr. Chadband is attached to no particular
drawing-room for tea. All the furniture is shaken and dusted, the

victuals for tea, a person does it with a view--perhaps--more to
patron saint, not to omit the ceremony of announcement. Much

without removing her eyes from Chadband, says with dreadful
persecuted and languidly folding up his chin into his fat smile,
murmur. Rachael, pay the eightpence!"
lifts up his admonitory hand.
because we are calculated to walk? It is. Could we walk, my friends,
determination to persecute, since it must be within everybodys
At this period of the entertainment, Guster, who has never recovered
"Why, bless my heart," says Mr. Snagsby, "whats the matter!"


hearing the altercation, have appeared upon the stairs. Guster having
"Well!" says the constable, "so far, it seems, he had grounds for
obliged to you." And Mr. Snagsby again relates his experience, again
you to judge now! I shook these two half-crowns out of him," says the
another five while I was asleep and another boy he thieved ninepence

in his hand for a little ventilation.
according to the best models. Nor is the examination unlike many such


Carboys office, or was it a gentleman of your acquaintance? Take

pocket-handkerchief. Mrs. Snagsby whispers "Hush!"

stock, or a stone, or a post, or a pillar.
her belief that he is a limb of the arch-fiend.
young friend, and inquire of this good lady where I am to be found to
off, having once the audacity to begin--retires into private life

energies under too heavy contribution. He finds that nothing agrees
Mr. Guppy suspects everybody who enters on the occupation of a stool


a low whistle is wafted through the Inn and a suppressed voice cries,
"I say! Just throw out half a crown if you have got one to spare. I
"Can you give a fellow anything to read in the meantime?" says Mr.

During this short colloquy, the active Smallweed, who is of the
drinks and smokes in a monkeyish way; and his neck is stiff in his
no use trying him with anything less than a full-sized "bread" or
intelligent benignity into his ancient eye and winks upon her. Then,
the seams. He has the faded appearance of a gentleman in embarrassed
legs and rubs his hands. Beholding him in which glow of contentment,

"Aye, aye!" cries Mr. Jobling with an arch look. "Youre there, are
"Not the least in the world. I have the pleasure of drinking his good


when it came to creditors making rows at the office and to people
"what can a fellow do, I ask you, BUT enlist?"
mean it."
in argument. They may--or they may not--have some reference to a

Chancellor, across the lane. Come, Jobling," says Mr. Guppy in his
a knowledge of his house and his habits. I know he has a room to let.
modesty, "that I cant make him out. I appeal to our mutual friend
dont see why you shouldnt go in for it, when everything else
at his disposal. "For never shall it be said," Mr. Guppy adds with

Jobling approving, Smallweed puts himself under the tall hat and
eight and three, and three Pollys is eight and six. Eight and six in
table beside him, among the usual lumber, stand an empty gin-bottle
"Its always more like a fit than a nap," says Mr. Guppy, shaking him
help him up, and he staggers against the wall and stares at them.
odd times."
"I assure you we found it so," says Mr. Guppy. "Would you allow me to

such a cat to keep the mice away."
that he would terminate his little entertainment by standing treat at
But what Mr. Weevle prizes most of all his few possessions (next
borrow yesterdays paper from the Sols Arms of an evening and read
as before mentioned, able to cook and clean for himself as well as to

youth.
the hardest facts. In respect of ideality, reverence, wonder, and
character was not good, and he had been bred at a charity school in a
family tree, the house of Smallweed, always early to go out and late
of the fire-place, the superannuated Mr. and Mrs. Smallweed while

"Ho!" says Grandfather Smallweed. "Ten minutes."
Smallweed himself, whom it throws back into HIS porters chair like a
to the monkey tribe that attired in a spangled robe and cap she might
modelling that action of her face, as she has unconsciously modelled
puts on in an iron basket, and the butter (and not much of it) in a
recovered his late exertion.
the butter on the loaf with every precaution against waste and cuts
On this severe matron, as she returns to her task of scraping the
Small nods again.
wisdom. "Thats such advice as your father would have given you,
visiting Mrs. Smallweed with one of these admonitions, is
sufficiently cool to resume his discourse, and even then he mixes it
Judy, not interested in what she has often heard, begins to collect
with the thorns than the flowers, but she has in her time been
remotest periods. Her systematic manner of flying at her and pouncing
Charley swallows a great gulp of tea in token of submission and so


for some dress or accoutrements that he has altogether laid aside.
upon his thighs and his elbows squared, he looks as though, if he
carry my years. Im older than HER," nodding at his wife, "and see
no. I wasnt."
together in my business.)"
"Afraid to order the pipe? We are not so mercenary as that, sir.
"And dont you occupy yourself at all?"
visitor in a key too low for the old mans dull hearing as he looks
He will have his bond, my dear friend."

Youre a sweltering toad. Youre a chattering clattering broomstick
friend, thatll do. Oh, dear me, Im out of breath. O Lord!" And Mr.
Smallweed with grave attention and now and then fans the cloud of
"Ha! Youre prudent, prudent, sir!" cries Grandfather Smallweed,
the city to make you a further advance upon? Two good names would be
still composedly smoking. "No. Thats not my sort either."
me a lift with my little pittance--if at that time you could have

"Well?" returns the old man shrilly and sharply.
his lips for a moment and carrying his eyes back from following the

intentionally or accidentally, I dont know. Perhaps your friend in
"So you think your friend in the city will be hard upon me if I fall
regions of reflection which its education and pursuits have opened to

rifle-shooting, and archery accommodation, and fencing appliances,
business, at some odd time or times.
face he has no eyebrow, and on the other side he has a bushy black
a wooden cabin in a corner two mattresses and bedding. These being

Mr. Bucket
everywhere. When a breeze from the country that has lost its way
echoing regions below the deserted mansion, and heralded by a remote
one--and that one bachelor friend of his, a man of the same mould and

"Not at all," says Mr. Tulkinghorn. "You told me, Snagsby, that you

"Thank you, sir, I am sure," returns the stationer with his cough of
"With pleasure, sir."
his hands, and his hands behind him, a composed and quiet listener.

if you will do so."

Dont you see? Quiet!"
want."
intentions, if I understand you?"
"No," says Mr. Snagsby, considering, "I dont know anybody of that
constable and his guide fall into a deep abstraction as they come
Snagsby passes along the middle of a villainous street, undrained,
faces and fades away up alleys and into ruins and behind walls, and
people are known in Tom-all-Alones by any Christian sign, there is
be Jo. Comparison of notes between Mr. Snagsby and the proprietress





be a comfort to you, and look after you in your old age, you know."


the physic he has been to get, which he delivers with the laconic
Through the clearer and fresher streets, never so clear and fresh to

front of the figure is towards them, but it takes no notice of their
"What about those rings you told me of?" asks Bucket.

"Then, what," retorts that worthy, pointing to the figure, "did you
skill--and then puts them, in a little pile, into the boys hand and

Bucket, to whom it is, on an emergency, as natural to be groom of the

do," says Mr. Bucket, shaking hands with him and blessing him in the

on me as at first. I do not quite know even now whether it was
One incident that occurred before we quitted Mr. Boythorns house, I
"No excuse is necessary," I returned, "if you wish to speak to me."
"Go on, if you please," said I.
wish that, I know that I should win less, as to wages here. Good. I
with a certain grace and propriety.
of Paris in the reign of terror.
stamp it on my mind so that I might keep it faithfully. And I will!
appeared to me that his industry was all misdirected. I could not
sanguine Richard, capable of so much happiness then, and with such
him, "are you beginning to feel more settled now?"
Settled? You mean, do I feel as if I were settling down?"
addressed me in his frankest and most feeling manner, thus: "My dear

We were in a solitary place, and he put his hands before his eyes and

articled in Lincolns Inn.
and then I am provided for. No. I look upon it as a pursuit which is
And then he showed me, proved by elaborate calculations in his

key for us. So if you will walk round and round here with me, we can
tell me, and in the second place because I have no secrets from
"Upon my word, Caddy," said I, "you are in the general conspiracy to
Esther thinks that I should be in a better, and truer, and more

on fire. "My darling child, if you insist upon it! This has caused

shoes and had had her white muslin extinguished in shawls, she was



"No, pray dont, father!" cried his son.




"That you may depend I will do, dear father, with all my heart,"
that I would not have said a word in his disparagement for any
Going upstairs to Mrs. Jellybys room (the children were all
"He has been unfortunate in his affairs and is a little out of
"I am sure, Ma--" began Caddy.
have none. I have often told you, Caddy, you have no such sympathy."
to attract Mrs. Jellybys attention.
"Caddy," said Mrs. Jellyby, pausing for a moment in her occupation
yours, Ma, because I never could be happy without it. I never, never
"Caddy, Caddy!" returned Mrs. Jellyby, opening another letter with
sort letters and to repeat occasionally in quite a charming tone of
and I have engaged a boy, and there is no more to be said. Now, pray,
matters. "Then you must bring him some evening which is not a Parent
would do for her unfortunate father and for Peepy when she had a home
spite of the elder Mr. Turveydrop) that she would be the happier and
suppose there never was such a fortunate little creature in the
her a kiss. "How glad am I to see you, Charley!"
a-being took such care of! And Tom, he would have been at school--and

miss."
As soon as Richard and I had held the conversation of which I have
right at last, our anxiety was not much relieved by him.
granted. His name was entered at the Horse Guards as an applicant for
He arrived post-haste with the intelligence one evening, and had a
"Well, well!" said Mr. Jarndyce. "I want to set you more right yet. I

kindness that day, cousin John."
quite content to know it. But what I have of certainty, sir," said
"Ada, my dear," said Mr. Jarndyce, recovering his cheerfulness,
"You think I have begun ill, sir," retorted Richard. "I HAVE, I
anything that gives you pain. You have your remedy in your own hands.
not come for your standing pledged to one another. It is not right,
A long silence succeeded.
and often talk of you with Esther, and--and perhaps you will
and even his grief at parting from Ada, who remained in Hertfordshire

his upper lip.

"No offence, I hope, miss. I am one of the roughs."
"No, miss. To my knowledge I never heard it. I thought I had seen you
"Have you many pupils, Mr. George?"
"Not much of that, sir, though that HAS happened. Mostly they come
taking aim at anybody, but he was in that condition of resentment and

akimbo and the other resting on his leg, looking in a brown study at

to him and with a great many hopeful projects. My guardian knew where
all seemed perfectly at their ease, by no means in a hurry, very
was so curious and self-contradictory to me, who had no experience of
When we had been there half an hour or so, the case in progress--if I
and some of them said it was that way, and some of them jocosely
Kenge; and he had seen me and made me a forlorn bow, which rendered
"I wonder you remember those times, Esther," she returned with her
in the first chill of the late unexpected recognition when I saw,
I put up my finger, for Miss Flite was close by me, having kept
sat by Gridley this afternoon, I seemed to hear the roll of the

always tractable with me and as she too said, "Fitz Jarndyce, my
wearing spectacles, and dressed in a black spencer and gaiters and a
"Oh, indeed?" said the old gentleman. "Your name is George? Then I am
dress were blackened all over, we passed along a dreary passage into


accommodate you to the utmost of my power."
him), taking Miss Flite with him. Mr. Bucket agreeing, they went away
when the bell was rung and my guardian appeared, "on the chance," he
He had been still writing in his hiding-place, and still dwelling on
"Mr. Jarndyce, it is very kind of you to come to see me. I am not
my guardian.

sometimes. I am. Hold up, hold up! Youll lose your temper with the

at the Chancellor. Give in? Why, I am surprised to hear a man of your


Jo and Mr. Tulkinghorn; and the complete equipage whirls though the
neighbourhood agree to hold in awe; his remembrance of Detective Mr.
cant speak out at once? More impracticable men and boys persist in
These various signs and tokens, marked by the little woman, are not
think somebody may have been murdered there in bygone times. Guster
He has no respect for Mr. Chadband. No, to be sure, and he wouldnt
Cooks Court to-morrow night, "to--mor--row--night," Mrs. Snagsby
it were some mangy bird he had caught and was plucking before eating
softening; because it does not make war like the hawk, but comes home
profit, to your gain, to your welfare, to your enrichment! My young
Chadband composes herself grimly by the fire and warms her knees,

just now from his little woman--at about the period when Mr. Chadband
that light?"
million of times over, it is. It is! I say to you that I will
"My friends," he resumes after dabbing his fat head for some

and of a bull, and of a lady, and of a sovereign, was THAT the

dancings, and their malt liquors, and their butchers meat and
out with a remorseful air, for he feels that it is in his nature to
thinks Jo. "Mr. Snagsby ant a-going to say nothink to me to-night."
"Jist!" says Jo.
"Jo," whispers the law-stationer softly as the boy lingers on the
to the room he came from and glides higher up. And henceforth he

and more crime than is in Newgate. For howsoever bad the devil can be
exceedingly cold water. As he rubs himself upon a large jack-towel,
winks with sympathy. This chafing over, the ornamental part of Mr.
"What was it like?"
limited to the setting forth of very simple breakfast requisites for
"I see the marshes once," says Phil, contentedly eating his



Nor yet eighteen. Its betwixt em, somewheres."
course of time, I come to ten and a eight in it; two tens and a eight
theyre past mending. Most of the tramping tinkers used to come and
swallering the smoke, and what with being natrally unfortnate in
"I remember, Phil. You were walking along in the sun."
"When you stops, you know," cries Phil, putting down his cup and
If they want a man to box at, let em box at me. Let em knock me
into business order. That done, he takes a turn at the dumb-bells,
bearers and attended by a lean female with a face like a pinched
"I should hardly have been more surprised to have seen your friend in
"So we got a hackney-cab, and put a chair in it, and just round the
Phil, who has never beheld the apparition in the black-velvet cap
"My dear Mr. George," says Grandfather Smallweed, "would you be so
fire, and having shaken him up as usual, and having released his
"He has never hurt anybody but himself," says Mr. George, smiling.
Mr. George answers with a cool nod, adding, "Go on. You have not come

vindictiveness expressive of an intense desire to tear and rend the
trooper raising his head, she makes another poke at her esteemed
himself that he is not smothered yet.
Smallweed. "I am an old man, my dear Mr. George, and I need some
forward and paid it all up, honourable."
and he is good for his chance in a lawsuit, and he is good for his
"What are you up to, now?" asks Mr. George, pausing with a frown in

"Cant be a lawyer, then," says Mr. George, folding his arms with an

have."

Smallweed, lowering his tone, "that I want YOU to betray anything.
gallery, looks here and there upon the higher shelves, and ultimately
terminating at the cab, he deposits him there; and the fair Judy

perfection with the troopers help. He is borne into Mr.
Chesney Wold, hey?"
hand, and their very case worn threadbare. In manner, close and dry.
this morning, cold and raw!" Mr. Tulkinghorn warms before the bars,
"Mr. George," says Grandfather Smallweed with a tremulous wave of his
know what YOU say?"
compass, however. You served under Captain Hawdon at one time, and


for his inspection (though he still holds it in his hand), but
this kind I feel as if I was being smothered. And that is my
friend in the tenderest manner not to be rash, but to do what so
"I do assure you, sir," says Mr. George, "not to say it offensively,
"IS he?" Mr. Tulkinghorn quietly sits down to write.
five guineas or more, that Mr. George engages to go and see him. Mr.
"If I wasnt as weak as a brimstone baby, sir," whispers Grandfather

back to the fire, watching the disappearance of Mr. Smallweed and
sedately marches to a street of little shops lying somewhere in that

when youre near him. You are that restless and that roving--"
Mrs. Bagnet is not at all an ill-looking woman. Rather large-boned, a
married Joe Pouchs widow when he died in North America, SHED have

"Ah! There now!" cries Mrs. Bagnet, turning about from her saucepans
have not much to do with all this!"
orchestra. Young Woolwich is the type and model of a young drummer.
Then well consult. Whatever the old girl says, do--do it!"
what the old girl started on. In the present business."
try the bassoon. The old girl borrowed a bassoon from the bandmaster
Bagnet, like a military chaplain, says a short grace. In the

himself to Mr. Bagnet, but having an eye solely on the old girl all

when the bassoon and fife are expected by a British public at the
So he whistles it off and marches on.
rather nettled.
the inside of my door this morning if I had thought of your being
to the shooting gallery.
and eke into Sir Leicesters bones. The blazing fires of faggot and
heard. Sir Leicesters cousins, in the remotest degree, are so many

ornaments out of coloured paper, and also for singing to the guitar
for the pension list. Efforts have been made to get her on it, and
somehow William Buffy found when he came in that these were not times
(for the world of fashion does not stretch ALL the way from pole to
yawn on ottomans. Cousins at the piano, cousins at the soda-water
"I thought so. I felt sure that some uncommon eye must have picked


"Yes, indeed," repeats Sir Leicester. "Into Parliament."
does not lessen the anomaly, which is fraught with strange

the great presence into which he comes.
quiet park, where the ivy and the moss have had time to mature, and
her, to the best of my judgment; and my mother speaks of her with
girl, if this pretty girl will engage herself to him, I think it a
"Am I to understand, sir," says Sir Leicester, "and is my Lady to
"Willingly, Lady Dedlock. There is nothing I could desire more."
the great side assuredly, on the small one no less assuredly."
Sir Leicester very magnificent again at the notion of Mrs. Rouncewell
magnificence, therefore, on the part of Sir Leicester.
to see her only so often. If at the expiration of that time, when she
be justly drawn between them."
"Will it be more comprehensible, Sir Leicester, if I say," the
Dedlock mind.
you have spoken. It will have no effect of itself, one way or other,
least."
"Come to me, child. Tell me the truth. Are you in love?"
her dark hair with that motherly touch, and watching her with eyes so
"Confide in me, my child. Dont fear me. I wish you to be happy, and
hearth so desolate?
it to keep themselves, they MUST keep maids and valets--the cousins
holland, carving and gilding puts on mortification, and the Dedlock
Wold at the same time, seldom rejoicing when it rejoices or mourning
Spanish females costume, three-quarter face portrait of Miss Jogg
state and brilliancy surrounding her only gives him the greater zest
Tulkinghorn read the affidavit in Jarndyce and Jarndyce--particularly
Chesney Wold, and she had never left it. Sir Leicester, quite
discomfited and not presenting a very impressive letter of
the young man wait."
"You are, of course, the person who has written me so many letters?"


one another--and if it had been any business of that sort, I should
My Lady, with a disdainful gesture of the hand that holds the screen,


own portrait that it completely knocked me over, so much so that I
what he supposes that his taste for likenesses has to do with her.
mention in confidence--I know it in the way of my profession at Kenge
admitted, yet I have had a present of my articles made to me by Kenge
"I dont know. I think so. Yes."
Esther Summerson, but Esther Hawdon."

distress. Upon which law-writer there was an inquest, and which
The wretched boy is nothing to my Lady, and she does NOT wish to have
bundle of old letters."
Hawdon; in your ladyships knowing both these names VERY WELL; and in
telling anything.

No. Words, sobs, and cries are but air, and air is so shut in and
Esthers Narrative

names, which I dare say they are not), and would become quite fiery
its disadvantages; my sons choice of a wife, for instance, is



pursuit of it, judging from the reputation he had earned.



uncomfortable. I was so ashamed of my folly that I did not like to
pain, on every word she said and weigh it over and over again in
told us that she was going to be married in a month and that if Ada
What he did at the office, I never knew; Caddy said he was a
parental feelings to the height of contemplating that event as being

being all tomahawked together."
and when she IS told it, she only gives me a placid look, as if I was

guardian would not have given her if we had encouraged him, it would
as she said. Now, mercy upon us! The idea of her learning
what could be done there, and Ada and Charley remained behind to take
waste-paper and Borrioboolan documents, as an untidy stable might be
confine our greatest efforts to her mama and her mamas room, and a
married! Oh, Caddy, you silly, silly, silly puss!"
dear Miss Summerson," said Mrs. Jellyby, "you know best, I dare say.
shaking her head at us with a half-reproachful smile like a superior
of the building would have been its affording a great deal of room to
letters, tea, forks, odd boots and shoes of children, firewood,
useless. Ma and Africa, together, upset the whole house directly. We
"Yes, Pa!" cried Caddy, going to him and embracing him

required then was so discouraging that Caddy, who was almost tired
say, Peepy bit him. Then there was old Mr. Turveydrop downstairs, in
Pardiggles mite, or their five boys mites. Mr. Quale, with his hair
of coolness with the whole of his large family, completed the party.
of woman from the thraldom of her tyrant, man. Mrs. Jellyby, all the
the company.

property was packed on the hired coach and pair that was to take her
I inclination to be angry, or time to be angry? How CAN you?"
respect to his father, whose deportment at that moment was
"Dear father, never!" cried Prince.

them earnestly, and opened his mouth twice. I was so sure of his
He answered "No" again, and this time my dear girl confidently
CHAPTER XXXI

"Thank you, miss. If you please, miss, did you know a poor person of
"I think I do, Charley, though not by name."
"Did she though, really, Charley?"
I asked if the brickmakers wife were ill, but Charley said no. It
appears to me that you and I can do no better than go round to
awful; and into it long sullen lines of cloud waved up like a sea
time, to the distant voices in the town, the barking of a dog, and
place was closer than before and had an unhealthy and a very peculiar
said to him, "Jo, Jo, whats the matter?"
held out above his burning eyes. "She looks to me the tother one. It

known him up in London yonder. Hadnt I, Jo?"
"Somewheres," repeated the boy in a louder tone. "I have been moved

in Mrs. Blinders attic with Tom and Emma again.

I think he must have begun his journey with some small bundle under

and was strangely unconcerned about himself, if I may say so strange

Mr. Skimpole had retreated from the hall to the drawing-room again
engaging smile, "I have not the least idea what he is to do then. But
My guardian stopped and looked at him with a whimsical mixture of
invest himself with such poetry as is open to him. He is no doubt
"In the meantime," I ventured to observe, "he is getting worse."
morning, when he can be wrapped up and removed. Well do that."
angrily, for he never seemed to consider Mr. Skimpole an accountable
compassionating his miserable state and being very anxious to help,

He was extremely gay all the rest of the evening, for he absolutely
Charleys last report was that the boy was quiet. I could see, from

us, that is to say, but Mr. Skimpole, who repeatedly suggested, in

I heard Adas voice outside, and I hurried to the door of
even reproached me with sobs and tears; but I wrote her a long letter
without the least fear or unwillingness, but I thought it best to

sure Tom would grow up to be a good man. At those times Charley would
there were many, many when I thought in the night of the last high

In the evening I was so much worse that I resolved to prepare
"if I am to be ill, my great trust, humanly speaking, is in you. And
to-night that I dont think I am well and that you are going to nurse
morning to get to the window and speak to my darling.

Charley; I am blind."
shut; and the night-porter, a solemn warder with a mighty power of
with a circle of acquaintance in the game of hide and seek, have been
Piper compare opinions on the subject of the young lady of
fetched from the same hostelry by young Perkins before he was sent to
comes and goes between his own room and the open street door twenty
after-supper stroll of ten minutes long from his own door and back
sniff and taste the air a little, "dont you observe, Mr. Weevle,

didnt see, in your room, what I saw there. That makes a difference."

"Ah, to be sure!" returns the other as if he were not over-fond of

time and now glides after him with a pocket handkerchief wrapped over
"I thought you had gone to Jericho at least instead of coming here,"
table with a great cabbage head and a long winding-sheet.
his elbow, leans his head on his hand, puts his feet on the fender,
that he shouldnt see me, so I waited till he was gone."
"Thats very like Lady Dedlock," says Mr. Guppy. "Its a speaking
acknowledge to you, Tony, that I dont think your manner on the
image imprinted on his eart and who is NOT altogether happy in those
appointed twelve oclock to-night to hand em over to me?"
heard him a little while afterwards, through the floor here, humming
that much, under me; but he cant put them together. Hes too old to
the letter n, long and hasty."

advising him not to call before, Boguey being a slyboots."

wont they?"
"I know three things. First, I know that here we are whispering in
is no fool. Whats that?"
consent to see that the door is shut.

admit of their seeing any sky without craning their necks and looking
you, since you have been such allies?"
meditation. "He may have found papers in something he bought, where
"What, in the devils name," he says, "is this! Look at my fingers!"

He goes downstairs, and Mr. Guppy tries to compose himself before the

him turning the letters over in his hand, standing just where that
They advance slowly, looking at all these things. The cat remains
to his title in his last act, has died the death of all lord
Interlopers
first floor of the house occupied as a rag, bottle, and general
engaged by Mr. J. G. Bogsby to sing at a series of concerts called
Arms parlour, to behold the tops of their heads while they are about
at a jolting gallop perched up aloft on the Phoenix and holding on to

steps departs, and the lamp-lighter going his rounds, like an
"Good gracious, gentlemen!" says Mr. Snagsby, coming up. "Whats this
"Hurt? No. Whats to hurt him!"

"My little woman, why do you look at me in that way? Pray dont do
goodness sake speak to me with that bitter expression and look at me
"My life," says the unhappy stationer, "would you have any objections
"I should be glad," says Mrs. Snagsby after contemplating his
so great that he entertains wandering ideas of delivering himself up
neednt take the trouble to mention it. I have had enough of that,
Jobling retorts, "Yes, indeed!" And both being now in a heated state,
apart from any kind of conspiring, however innocent. You know it is
"Yes," says Mr. Weevle. "Those are about the facts."
withdraw the observation."

out what he really had got stored up there, dont weigh with you at
the whole thing, if I understand you, Tony?"
de do, sir! How de do!"
"Theres your fare!" says the patriarch to the coachman with a fierce
an arm-chair. "Oh, dear me! Oh, my bones and back! Oh, my aches and
repeated a surprising number of times.
office of discovering the ashes of Mrs. Smallweeds brother."
mentioned that the old man was your uncle."
good our title. It is in the hands of my solicitor. Mr. Tulkinghorn,
his reach. "Will somebody obleege me with a spittoon? Will somebody
putting him through the usual restorative process of shaking and
like a hideous bird of prey newly added to her aviary.
great Harmonic feature of the week and announces in the bill that "J.
carriages set down doctors at the corner who arrive with the same
upon a time, who had the unpoliteness to live in a house where such a
gentlemen before mentioned pop in and out of every house and assist
and can only haunt the secret house on the outside, where he has the
Mercury is disposed, as he will presently declare to a
straight at him as on the last occasion.

"And the letters are destroyed with the person?"
Mr. Guppy thinks thats all.
handle of the door--comes in--and comes face to face with the young
that Mr. Tulkinghorn of the Fields is well.
Mr. Guppy sneaks away. Mr. Tulkinghorn, such a foil in his


drawn on yourself by Mr. Matthew Bagnet, and by you accepted, for the
last, I have paid, I may say, half as much again as this principal in


Bagnets in that case? Do you know they would be ruined to pay off my

appearance that is possibly referable to its having served through a

regimental nickname when they first became acquainted, in compliment
"I am not quite myself," returns the trooper; "I have been a little
print--you have done a shameful action and have deceived us cruelly.
cloak to wipe her eyes on in a very genuine manner, "How could you do
impossible for an old vagabond comrade to like your wife and family
trooper. "Anyhow, here I stand, this present day, NOT married to Joe
"And that was like me!" observes the penitent trooper, shaking his
Mrs. Bagnet, giving him one of her honest hands and giving her
broad-chested, upright attitude, as if he had made a final confession
patting him on the shoulder. "I trust my old Lignum to you, and I am
affairs of life. As they proceed with great gravity through the
"Shes worth her weight in gold," says the trooper.

to give consent from the circumstance of her returning with the words


"Judy," says the old man. "Have you got the pipe? Give it to me. Did
"I DONT know it, you know," says the old man quietly.
own terms.

Here some shrill spectre cries out in a mocking manner, "Oh, good

the shoulders of his comrade before the latter can recover from his
marches off with the trooper, shoulder to shoulder.
with some distinction there, for the clerk steps out of his pew to
way, though some people did disparage him to his poor mother. I ask
The clerk having now again gone in to say that they are still there
no occasion to come here to learn that, I suppose?"
The lawyer sits down in his easy-chair and stirs the fire. Mr. George
midst of his perfect assumption of indifference, he directs a sharp
family being injured on my account. And if I could bring them through
can replace this matter on its old footing, and I can go so far
sentiments. The trooper then takes from his breast-pocket a folded
Boiled beef and greens constitute the days variety on the former
Bagnet are supplied with their pipes, he is no better than he was at


bright with love of you, my boy. A little touched by the sun and the
Mr. George concludes by rising from his chair, seating the boy beside
and inaction of a sick-room. Before I had been confined to it many

perfectly at intervals, and I think vaguely at most times, that I was
them. It may be that if we knew more of such strange afflictions we
leave my bedside no more; but I had only said, when I could speak,
my heart and be as happy in my weakness as ever I had been in my
glad, that I was obliged to say, "Charley, if you go on in this way,
brighter than before.

chair and even giddily to walk into the adjoining room, leaning on
little while he sat with his hand over his face, but when he removed
I had read of Caddy in Adas letters, but not of Richard. I told him
Jarndyce has warped him out of himself and perverted me in his eyes.
ever can, anyhow, I believe, to such a pass have we got), I would do

we might so far counter-act the suit and prove too strong for it. But
is. He looks to it, flushed and fitfully, to do something with his
commission to broach one of them as soon as I should begin to talk.
yes, you are tired," said he. "Rest a little."

quoted. We did not appreciate the writer the less for laughing

We arranged a time for Miss Flite to come out by the coach and share
window-curtain. Yet I never saw her, for I had not as yet the courage
tears for the next ten minutes.
little--rambling you know," said Miss Flite, touching her forehead.
ungenteel bonnet--"
yours, miss, and partly because it had covered the baby."
"Why, who can she be?" said I.
down in a paper parcel. I had to preside, too, over the
Shortly."

diminutive friend when she comes in. Or it may frighten her. With
of them. Sense out of them. Good looks out of them. Good qualities
was a fierce, sour, angry bankrupt without a kind word or a kind
faces come, unsuspicious, within the influence of the mace and seal
as she sipped her glass of wine, "Yes, my dear, as I was saying, I
"My physician, Mr. Woodcourt, my dear, who was so exceedingly
"No," said I. "You forget how long I have been here."
do, governed them, tended the sick, buried the dead, and brought the
I could myself have kneeled down then, so far away, and blessed him
That he well deserved one, yes. That he would ever have one, no.
land!"
Oh, it was so much better as it was! With a great pang mercifully
Chesney Wold
of which he took charge, and he left us within half an hour of our
quite sensible enough to sit down now and write a note of thanks to
own restored to me. I knew this to be a weakness which must be
mirror, encouraged by seeing how placidly it looked at me. I was very
went to sleep. I had kept Mr. Woodcourts flowers. When they were
"Dear, dear, miss!" cried Charley, starting. "Is that you?"
before and after dinner, and were to talk in the garden after tea,
said, "Stubbs, I am surprised you dont canter when you know how much
sort of good humour, putting his head under my arm and rubbing his
its hinges, it shut up the whole house-front. This old lady had a
little loss of mine and was almost always cheerful. If I did think of
known the bride when I was last there, not only as the prettiest girl
There was a favourite spot of mine in the park-woods of Chesney Wold
arrival, and were not expected. I was far from being incurious or
and picturing to myself the female shape that was said to haunt it
something in her face that I had pined for and dreamed of when I was
her features, deepened the fascination that overpowered me. I cannot

bare earth in her great agony of mind, I felt, through all my tumult
to account for having given me life, but that my duty was to bless
again.
My unhappy mother told me that in my illness she had been nearly
had taken, it was her solitary struggle always; and no affection

standstill, but I can never shake him off."

is so good and sensible," said I, "that perhaps if he knew--"
by, made an enduring impression on my memory--I say I explained, or
then forgive her if you can, and cry to heaven to forgive her, which
such precautions as I could to hide from Charley that I had been
hold my place in this world that until within a short time back I had
myself as the danger and the possible disgrace of my own mother and
words returned, "Pray daily that the sins of others be not visited
well-kept beds and smooth turf; and I saw how beautiful and grave it
presently a sweet smell of limes, whose rustling I could hear, I
paused until I had gained the lodge-gate, and the park lay sullen and
to be. That made me think of all my past life; and that brought me,
that the darkness of the morning was passing away. It was not upon my
well that I was more concerned for their effect on her than on any
wait and wait, and expect and expect, and think and think, was such

girl! The old dear look, all love, all fondness, all affection.

when Ada asked me, over our work, if the family were at the house,
there a bright week, as I recollect the time, when one evening after
"but its a gentleman, miss, and his compliments, and will you please
"Mister Grubble, miss," returned Charley. "Dont you know, miss? The
home as in Mr. Boythorns garden.
except at church.
Richard, leading me to a chair and seating himself beside me.
"And I want you, Richard," said I, shaking my head, "to understand
want to appear quietly in your country-house here, with you under my
and--however, never mind all that botheration at present."

too; and so he had brought him. "And he is worth--not to say his
satisfied with his flesh and blood in a silk stocking.
something highly fascinating to my simplicity. I dont say it is for
that it did not serve Mr. Skimpoles idle turn quite as well as any
I had a tormenting idea that the influence upon him extended even
Skimpole soon afterwards appeared and made us merry for an hour. He


next year--you would find it hard to rest or settle. So do I. Now?

reproach. He was silent for a little while before he replied in a

interested to become lax about their interests; and people may die
discovers that Ada and I must break off and that if I dont amend
roads are not the same. Under one of the wills in dispute, I should
they involve, you would think me moderate in comparison."

prepossessions. So I come round to John Jarndyce. I tell you, my good

rather feel it to be so. But I shall be able to give myself fair-play
direction. Being of age now and having taken the step I have taken, I
other, readily."

means that I could think of, to warn him of it and to show him some

   my sake you are now laying up so much unhappiness for
   My dearest cousin, it is needless for me to say that you
   Ever, my dearest cousin, your most affectionate
I delicately said that there was a responsibility in encouraging
counting. Call it four and ninepence--call it four pound nine. They
dear Miss Summerson, intent upon the perfect working of the whole
It was very unfortunate for Richard, I said.
change--sensible in the last degree, I have no doubt, but
Somebody Dedlock, with a battle, a sprung-mine, volumes of smoke,


called it commission. Was it a five-pound note? Do you know, I think
when his cause was in the Chancellors paper, and being informed by
a chaise, or whatevers to be got, we shall have an hour then before
"Mr. Carstone has laid down the principle of watching his own

It required some attention to hear him on account of his inward
We understood from what followed that Mr. Skimpole was to be left
hand; Mr. Vholes quite still, black-gloved, and buttoned up, looking
And she kept her word?
When our time came for returning to Bleak House again, we were
a visit of a few hours to London, which something in the letter I had
possibility of doing anything meritorious.
very little of her. We are good friends, I am glad to say, but Ma
Looking at the corner, I plainly perceived the mark of Mr. Jellybys
"Four," said Caddy. "One in-door, and three out. They are
"I assure you, my dear," returned Caddy, smiling, "when the out-door
and that part of the work is, at first, a little discouraging, I must

melancholy boy, who, I hoped, had not been made so by waltzing alone
We danced for an hour with great gravity, the melancholy child doing
the apprentices. The two out-door boys went upon the staircase to put
I expressed myself much obliged to him, but did not think it
on together delightfully. You cant think what good companions they
tells him to come to me for sixpences. In short," said Caddy
in the front-parlour door by peeping out before she was asked for,
get out of the gangway."
head as she smiled and made a silent appeal to Caddy with her elbow.

referred to an occasion, miss, when I--when I did myself the honour

your own good sense or any persons sense must show em that--if I
back upon that offer or to renew it in any shape or form whatever,
of the record into implication. I cannot admit that I implied
that would do me the least service or give me the least pleasure. I
proceedings."
preferred, and I hope you will have sufficient consideration for me
you very much. Caddy, my dear, I am ready!"
staying with the other, "but this lady being present--your own




midsummer morning and encumbered by a black bulk-head of cellarage
firewood thrust between its jaws in hot weather.
consistently maintained through all its narrow turnings. Viewed by
practitioners would be swept from the face of the earth. Now you
the contrary. Question: But you think that their abolition would
Is he to perish? And of Vholess daughters? Are they to be
vacation. Mr. Vholes, and his young client, and several blue bags
scarcely fair, sir, scarcely fair!"
"Yes, with Ixion on it. How am I to get through the next four or five
making a lingering meal of him with his eyes as well as with his
Vholes. "Very naturally. It is my duty to attend to your interests
client and proceeds in his buttoned-up, half-audible voice as if
to Richard, though. There is encouragement in the sound to him.
a case like this, where the greater part of the costs comes out of
and no longer hidden and lost in the interests of others. THATS
of the suit; that in place of its being an abstraction, it is John

shrink from a professional duty, even if it sows dissensions in
this room, I mentioned to you that I could offer no opinion or advice
Mr. Vholes with the severity of a determined man, "when I ultimately

perplexed consideration and calculation of the date it may bear,
disparage by that word the three raw-visaged, lank, and buttoned-up

at that door; he was thwarted, in that quarter, of a set purpose, and

still examining papers, still going over the heaps and heaps of
you, I dont greatly relish the house, except in your company, and
he put those letters away anywhere, after you saw him alive, and that
responsibility."
quantity, from the cooks shop, rummaging and searching, digging,
prevailing interest through the Harmonic nights. Little Swills, in
them, knock at the closed door of the late lamenteds house, in a
party, Small included, are blackened with dust and dirt and present a
Mr. Weevle, thanking him, casts an eye about. Mr. Guppys eye follows
Mr. Tulkinghorn is looking on as if he had nothing else to do and
allow us to go upstairs."
in!"
"Mr. Guppy," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, "could I have a word with you?"

reddening ears to be one of those people at present instead of

"Tony," he says hurriedly to his astonished companion, "let us be
lunacy, while his friend shows a dazed mind in his whole head of hair
between those two great men, which at one time seemed inevitable, did
marvellous part of the matter is that England has not appeared to
and swallowing Doodle in the form of beer, and in swearing herself
cleared for action--all things prepared as beseems the Dedlock
this sunset hour, not in dull-grey stone but in a glorious house of
But the fire of the sun is dying. Even now the floor is dusky, and
separate them, and to glimmer here and there in horizontal lines
long drawing-room upon my Ladys picture is the first to come, the
"Chesney Wold, Thomas," rejoins the housekeeper with proud
auriferous and malty shower, but who are merely persons of a restless
unpensioning country.
holds forth after dinner. Daily the restless men who have no
are doing tolerably."
respects, I grieve to say, but--"
goodness to make these materials into two members of Parliament and
towards the Coodleites.)


"I dont know," says Sir Leicester, opening his eyes, "why Mr.
observes from his couch that man told him yaasdy that Tulkinghorn
candlesticks and trowels. These lively remarks the fair Dedlock
The debilitated cousin supposes he is "normously rich fler."
"No, no," says Sir Leicester, "I think not. My Lady, do you object to
into the chair proper to him when he has anything to communicate, on
beaten, and not "we."
am glad to acknowledge."
business part of the proceedings he carried all before him."

Lady, let me suggest in reference to that young woman--"
These remarks he offers with his unvarying politeness and deference
Tulkinghorn. You have been among them."
By the light of the fire, which is low, he can be seen looking
and treated her with great kindness, and kept her always near her.
difficult it is for the firmest of us (she was very firm) to be
was any such lady and rejects the whole history on the threshold. The
which contents her; Lady Dedlock, graceful, self-possessed, looked
face as if he had discharged his mind of some grave matter and were,
awaiting his notice--with his head bent low over the table, the old

two hours ago.
"How long have you known it?"
"Is this true concerning the poor girl?"
Leicesters unconsciously carrying the matter with so high a hand.


done. Do what remains now."
"Of repentance or remorse or any feeling of mine," Lady Dedlock
"Excuse me, Lady Dedlock," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, quite unmoved. "I am
forgotten the stain and blot upon this place, and where it is, and
in such a subject, he thoroughly knows its value.

satisfactory to myself on the course before me. I am not clear what
The sole consideration in this unhappy case is Sir Leicester."
case that I have, I would as soon have hoped to root up by means of

wall-chalking and the street-crying would come on directly, and you

day by day?" she asks, still looking at the distant sky.
She asks all her questions as if she were repeating them from memory
She stands absorbed in the same frozen way for some little time
the case had admitted of it; but unfortunately it does not."
He would know it all the better if he saw the woman pacing her own
thousand pounds upon a hideous old general with a mouth of false

dress before the journey nor talks of it afterwards. He melted out of
The lamplighter is skipping up and down his ladder on Mr.
say a word to you, sir."

"And what can you have to say, Snagsby," demands Mr. Tulkinghorn,

any house but ours. Consequently there was by good fortune ample
do assure you, sir!"
"No," says the other. "Well, well! This shall be stopped. I am sorry
which there is another key, which unlocks a chest in which there is

(but still looking out sideways), is only smiling contemptuously and
Mademoiselle Hortense makes another spring.

letter "r" sufficiently in this word, notwithstanding that she
chase her, to disgrace and to dishonour her. I will help you well,

ever!"
prisons are larger. In this city there are houses of correction



"You were dismissed by your lady, you know," Mr. Tulkinghorn
CHAPTER XLIII
tried not to hear: I mentally counted, repeated something that I
been so blest that I can relate little of myself which is not a story
written to him, gone to him, talked with him, tried every gentle and
I took one of these opportunities of mentioning my doubts of Mr.
encouraging or occupying a serious station towards anybody or
somehow. I suppose the people who admired him for them in his youth
"Did he?" said my guardian with a passing shade of vexation on his
infant!"
from the rusty state of the wire, and dirty footprints on the steps
entered a room there, and we followed. It was dingy enough and not at


"This is a day," said Mr. Skimpole, gaily taking a little claret in a
My guardian looked at us again, plainly saying, "You hear him?"

the subject with any consideration for the man. I dont go about
bill, or to put something on a file somewhere, to bring down a shower
and I dont know business. It is he who encourages me. He emerges
one for whom I cared.
and compose a little, and none of us have any idea of time or money."
"My dears, it is true," said Mr. Skimpole, "is it not? So it is, and
"We have sympathy, my roses," said Mr. Skimpole, "sympathy for
THEIR nests upstairs too. So we get on, we dont know how, but
Ada and I conversed with these young ladies and found them
"At the very time when he knew papa was lying ill by his wallflowers,
and we hadnt got them, and therefore of course we looked to a man
before me, fruit upon the table, the cloudless sky above me, the air
open doors, as we went downstairs, that his own apartment was a
before any of us; and I heard him at the piano while I was yet
where it was. I heard my name and found that my guardian was
from seeing whatever little there may be to gratify a polite and


ungrateful to our benefactors."

am very sensible, as I am sure we all are, of your consideration.
vicinity. Permit me, Mr. Jarndyce, to repeat to yourself, and to
self-command. It had been very much disturbed, but I was thankful to
reading-lamp.
"What concerns you, my dear Esther," said he, "concerns us all. You

"Guardian," said I, "do you remember, when we were overtaken by the
proud women were! You have seen Lady Dedlock. If you had ever seen
upon me. "Nor do I know yet."
him, and even in consideration for them in herself, she made the
"Yes, guardian, yes! And HER sister is my mother!"

but no such thing could be. If her mistrust of the lawyer whom she

"Yes, and her manner was strange when she took her shoes off and
better not to name even here, I will not fail to do it for her dear
should wish it to be so deliberately said, and so deliberately
said, had any reservation at all, no matter what?" said he with his
in a moment--said, "You have wrought changes in me, little woman,
"I can, and I do," I said.

timid days to the heavy time when my aunt lay dead, with her resolute
in the unselfish caution it gave me, and the consideration it showed
deliberation. It told me that I would gain nothing by such a marriage
be my protector, and if I felt that I could happily and justly become
But he did not hint to me that when I had been better looking he had
Still I cried very much, not only in the fullness of my heart after
cheerful as a bird. In fact, you are always to be cheerful; so let us
them down in their basket again.
Perhaps the name brought them to my remembrance. The dried remains of
the flowers had nothing to do with that. Then I took them into my own

I had made up my mind to speak to him now. In short, I had come down
difference presently, and we all went out together, and I said
morning of her hopes that Richard might exhaust his ardour in the
had said it so often that she was out of breath.

he secretly picked at one of the red pimples on his yellow face with
to accommodate these unpleasantnesses, but I necessarily look to
to drive him to an extremity, if nothing else did."
society and a father--AND a son," said Mr. Vholes, who had nearly
Vholes.
"And I would that you could take your leave, and we could all take
I said I would be careful not to do it.
Charley was to be my travelling companion, though I am sure I wanted
these two states of feeling; and the wheels seemed to play one tune
But when we got into a warm room in an excellent hotel and sat down,
the downs in the night. She was surrounded by boats, and we said how
asked a sergeant standing on the guardhouse-steps where he lived. He
Down to--ah, poor poor fellow!--to the end, he never received me but

only want to have been in the church to have made the round of all
back!"
He was in that mood in which I thought it best not to increase his
softened voice and kissed the letter as he asked me.
head down on his arm. It greatly affected me to see him so, but I
face looking at me as if he were sorry, I put my hand on his shoulder
the midst of my troubles and perplexities, to know that I am pressing
shall not be without means. Free of my commission, I shall be able to

officers who were landing from a boat, and pressing about them with
courage had quite failed me.

"Ah! Little Miss Flite!" he said. "She lives the same life yet?"

spoke to him of his voyage out and home, and of his future plans, and
spirits and was thoroughly pleased to see Mr. Woodcourt again, whom




for me. I was glad to see it. I felt for my old self as the dead may
burning, as the lamp of life hums in Tom-all-Alones, heavily,
trusses of polemical straws with the crooked knife of his mind or
pestilential gas in which he lives, not one obscenity or degradation

journeyed a long distance and is footsore and travel-stained. She

"Let me look at your forehead," he says, bending down. "I am a
you."
their wives too."
You have no young child?"

intent on getting along unseen that even the apparition of a stranger

he repeats the curve, the duck, the dive, and scours away again. To
"Yes, I see you once afore at the inkwhich," whimpers Jo. "What of
He says to the woman, "Miserable creature, what has he done?"
along with me, sir, down at Saint Albans, ill, and a young lady, Lord
passionate tears.
that he contends against an avoidance of the boy, which is so very

again, and concludes by laying his profile against the hoarding in a
he never heern about it, that he never went fur to hurt her, that he
After two or three such adjurations, Jo lifts up his head again,
"But I want, in the young ladys name, to know. You may trust me. No

me if Im above ground," concludes Jo, nervously repeating all his
will not run away, I know very well, if you make me a promise."
Woodcourt, close to the houses on the opposite side of the street. In
his mind how and where he shall bestow his companion. "It surely is a
done. He stops there, looks round, and beckons Jo. Jo crosses and
breath, Jo!" "It draws," says Jo, "as heavy as a cart." He might add,
face brightens somewhat; and by little and little he eats the slice
birds are domiciled with a Mrs. Blinder, in Bell Yard, he repairs to

that they may be in the right way. So he tells Jo, for his
at some length, she performs the courtly ceremony of presentation. He
experience that its not disagreeable to Miss Flite, and since its
get him into one, which is a system that I dont take kindly to."

as you see. Hence the difficulty. Do you happen to know any one in
place is. You are welcome to a quiet corner of it for the boy if the

comes out of the street, the better. You, Phil! Bring him in!"
interesting about thee.
"He is a kind friend to you, for he is going to give you lodging room



Yes, it appears.
him.

"I am sorry," says Allan, "to have touched so sore a place."
chafes and goads me till--Bah! Nonsense! I am forgetting myself. Mr.
Jo and his conductor presently return, and Jo is assisted to his
be so kind any person as is a-passin nigh where I used fur to sleep,
of a few large letters to break the awful monotony and save the
"Its come at last!" thinks the afflicted stationer, as recollection
against his desk, protesting, "I never had a secret of my own, sir. I

in the solemnest way, not to talk of Jo to any one, even my little
Jo is very glad to see his old friend and says, when they are left

Nothing less than a repetition of that infallible remedy will relieve
out, wery large so that any one could see it anywheres, as that I wos
little earth, shall meet no more. No more.
from his superfluity of life and strength, seeming to shed down
signs to Phil to carry his table out. When the little hammer is next
After watching him closely a little while, Allan puts his mouth very
us. WE never knowd nothink. I never knowd what it wos all about."
he wos. Its time fur me to go down to that there berryin ground,
there, as I used for to clean with my broom. Its turned wery dark,
"Ill say anythink as you say, sir, for I knows its good."

in town is awake. In Lincolnshire the Dedlocks of the past doze in
in herself as one able to reserve whatsoever she would under
she is still the last who might be supposed to have any dread of him.
embroidery or some such pretty thing, and as she bends her head over
nothing to any one of what passes between us."
brooding, looking dreamily at her.
"And if I were to say to-day, Go! Leave me! I should say what would
rendering it far better for you that you should not remain here. You
"I!"
other departed monsters.

own in black paint and dust, and the echoing mews behind have a dry
And yet--and yet--she sends a look in that direction as if it were
"Mr. Tulkinghorn, be so good as to ring. Thank you. Request," says
As he turns towards her, he finds that the impression she makes upon
little emphasis.
an intention with our--our fancies which renders them not altogether
assurance that this fancy is at an end, I have come to the conclusion
great--I believe unquestionably very great, sir--for a young woman in

support of her view. He entirely agrees with my Lady. The young woman
"--I should prefer the course which will the soonest relieve you of
Rosa has been crying and is yet in distress. On her coming in, the
no better. If she had remained here, sir, she would have improved, no

remarks. "Mr. Rouncewell," he returns, "do not mention it.
room where my Lady sits. Sir Leicester stands to return his parting
Lady Dedlock dines alone in her own room to-day. Sir Leicester is

He stops in his rubbing and looks at her, with his hands on his
business--any reproach and exposure that impend over yourself."

any insensible instrument used in business.
about that. As to sparing the girl, of what importance or value is
it. She rises from table, takes a lounging-chair, and reclines in it,


good evening."
often are, for its accuracy. "And what do YOU say," Mr. Tulkinghorn
up within his old black satin waistcoat. He is in the confidence of
It is a moonlight night, but the moon, being past the full, is only
with a clash, and he leaves her passing on into the dark shade of
it a still night in gardens and in woods, and on the river where the
effulgence; the noises that arise from the streets are fewer and are
road. While the dogs are yet barking and howling--there is one dog
particular meaning, from that ceiling. It is not likely that he has
and people unaccustomed to it enter, and treading softly but heavily,
soul of Allegory, and all the brains it has--stark mad. It happens

an extra smack before breakfast, smoking an additional pipe after
the changes wrought by time, to examine him in the catechism,
the morning of this day to buy a pair; he is, as invariably, taken in
On this present birthday, Mr. Bagnet has accomplished the usual
done."
recalls him. The stopped fowls going round again, Mrs. Bagnet closes
sure to bring mother something, and begin to speculate on what it
Mr. Bagnet asks why.
his mind to the dinner, which is a little endangered by the dry
guitar-strings. Their limbs appear to have struck roots into their
and the dinner-service washed up and polished in the backyard. The

dont he, Lignum?"
more gaily, "but youre so quick, Mrs. Bagnet."
"Why, its a wonder, George!" Mrs. Bagnet exclaims. "Its the
reality, as ever can be. Now you shall fasten it on yourself, for
got into action. "If that dont bring you round, George," says she,
out of that."

The toast having been drunk with enthusiasm, Mrs. Bagnet returns

Mr. Bucket, not unwelcome, has sat himself down next to Mr. George
you think about father? Do you think father could recommend a

What a very nice backyard, maam! Any way out of that yard, now?"

"And this is brother, is it, my dears?" says Mr. Bucket, referring to
Georges godson.
Nothing could be more acceptable to the little circle than this call
words are "to come up to the scratch."
that Mrs. Bucket and Mrs. Bagnet may before then become, in a manner,
with the secret sympathy of friendship, also rises. He dotes upon the
a price for my friend, but I want you to have your proper percentage
"Thank you," says Mr. Bucket, "thank you. Good night, maam. Good
make up his mind to relinquish his friendly hold, replies, "Wait half
one thing, and conversation is another. Its my duty to inform you
Im a-going to tell you what I want you for. There has been a murder
"Last night! Last night?" repeats the trooper thoughtfully. Then it
"my wish is, as it has been all the evening, to make things pleasant.
George, and such is my duty."
"Only I," returns the trooper, "but as I know it, do me one more good

anything but cap-border, and a little lean, long-fingered hand,
expressive of devotion to this pride of her life that I should be
was a very easy journey, for I had only to rise a little earlier in


to come back and confuse me.

of me that night. And I was so rejoiced to know it and so comforted
amuse and cheer her, and we did not talk in our usual confidential
At Caddys request I took the supreme direction of her apartment,
play a chord or two to astonish the baby, which I never knew it to do
Then there was old Mr. Turveydrop, who was from morning to night and

everything my room contains, is at your service, my dear. Do not," he

and then sit down with his head against the wall, and make no attempt
notwithstanding. I was quite reconciled to myself now, but I still

What could I do to reassure my darling (I considered then) and show
when we were all three together, "so Woodcourt has restored Caddy
many who could ill spare him. As Miss Flite, and Caddy herself, and
half inclined for another voyage. But that appears like casting such
which was a favourite with my guardian.
chair. That had not been my usual place before the letter, but it was
to speak to you and my cousin John when you are together!"
"Why then, my dear," said I, "there can be nothing amiss--and why
little changed. I had thought so more than once lately. I could not
her pillow so that it was hidden.

miles from here, sir, Mr. C.s address is not a hundred miles from
my professional duty to study and to understand a gentleman who
generally lose), money is the word. Now, sir, upon the chances of Mr.
appearance is not interested in whatever concerns his friend."
not beyond that. I could not go beyond that, sir, without wronging
"And Mr. Carstones address, Mr. Vholes?"
open, Mr. Woodcourt was in his presence for some moments without
"What part is that?"
a very different opinion. To make short of a long story, I am afraid
"Well, well!" he cried, shaking it off. "Everything has an end. We
suppose that I am splitting my head and half breaking my heart over

"My dear," said I, "you have not had any difference with Richard


words that ran in it repeated. Jarndyce and Jarndyce.
is only an outsider and is not in the mysteries. We have gone into
offices and near Vholes."
We are really spinning along. Ask Vholes. We are giving them no rest.
features to the hour of his death.
He took a few turns up and down and sunk upon the sofa. "I get," he
shall never go home any more!" With those words my darling drew his

time! And besides, it was not a long-considered step. We went out one
there to darken their way; I did not do that.
my darling completely broke down. She clung round my neck, calling me
of that, you know, when I am coming back so soon!"
her there, that I could get no comfort for a little while as I walked
stony-hearted one, and I so longed to be near her and taking some


I told him all about it and how her first entreaties had referred to


and distrusted and who had long watched and distrusted her, one for
known of him, my interest and my fears were so strongly aroused in
has openly mentioned it in many places. He is said to have expressed

My guardian said directly he would go too. Now, besides that I liked
have had--as I have read--for a weed or a stray blade of grass. In an
He scarcely seemed to be the prisoner. What with his coolness and his
myself under the condescension of the present visit. I feel the

"Exactly so, sir," returned Mr. George, folding his arms upon his
"No offence, sir," said Mr. George. "I am very sensible of your
"But the mere truth wont do," rejoined my guardian.
thank you all the same, sir, but--no lawyer!"
Unfolding his arms and changing his position, he stood with one
as clearly as I can."


own way--if youll excuse my mentioning anything so disagreeable to a
worth nothing to me."
Ive got to say."
"Real good friends of mine, they are," sald Mr. George. "It was at
basket, in which there was a piece of cold pickled pork, a little tea

Her friendly indignation had an exemplary effect upon her husband,
good-humouredly. "Im sure Im surprised at that. I wonder you dont
discovery of the real perpetrator of this deed may be of the last
to it."
was indignantly sure of there being no possibility of a reason for my
"A gentleman like you ought to know best, sir," returned Mrs. Bagnet,
too breathless to proceed, occasioning Mr. Bagnet to say, "Old girl!
Woolwich about whitening and wrinkling mothers heads. For fifty
Mrs. Bagnet made another application to her skirts and brought forth


that when Mr. Bucket and that finger are in much conference, a
here again the next day. This evening he will be casually looking
(fortunately an amiable lady in whom she takes an interest) for
woe. All the state coachmen in London seem plunged into mourning; and
the deceaseds house. "And so you are. And so you are! And very well
down--Where are all those secrets now? Does he keep them yet? Did
from the carriage when the opportunity he has settled with himself
as to Mr. Buckets letters, that wary person is not the man to
other, Mr. Bucket, with much deliberation, pronounces it of the right

brought upon a goodly tray with a decanter of sherry. Mr. Bucket

Leicester. "Do you wish to hold any conversation with me in private?"
decoration in his mind and thinks it as likely as not that Volumnia
may be easily supposed, recovered its tone since the late diabolical
may have been followed from my house, watched at my house, even first
illustrative of the respect in which my deceased friend"--he lays a
lives, that her nerves are unstrung for ever, and that she has not
almost said "my dear"--"it aint easy to answer those questions at

"In fact, Volumnia," proceeds Sir Leicester, "it is not holding up a
discreet."
satisfactory to all. When I depict it as a beautiful case, you see,
The cousin, who has been casting sofa-pillows on his head, in a


"Are you so much? But then, you see, youre broad in proportion and

Lady a good temper?"
very pale, she is dressed in slight mourning and wears two beautiful
"No, my Lady, Ive seen him!"
by, out of view.
Not a doubt about it.
of it," says Mr. Bucket, warming his hands and looking pleasantly at
"Half-past nine."

familiar demon, he confidently instructs Mercury "just to mention
slowly to his easy-chair with that observant gravity of yesterday in

"That is enough."
"Against the soldier?"
that will, give you a shock. But Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, you

silence, without moving hand, foot, or feature, "which I hope is not
"I would greatly prefer, officer," Sir Leicester returns stiffly, "my
overstep it. I would not suffer it. I would not endure it. You bring

who ought to have been her husband." Mr. Bucket stops and
All this, and more, has happened in your own family, and to and
difficulty about admitting of it, you tell her that its no use, that
soon, however, controlling himself to say that he does not comprehend
Dedlock, Baronet; and supposing I was to be picked off now, you might
Sir Leicester indistinctly answers, "Officer. The best you can, the
Leicester Dedlock, Baronet. Well! You do see him, and mind you, it
person, are you?"

aloud, "Yes. You first!" and retires to his former place.
no, I dont think so! Oh, no, I dont think so! And not in the same
dont concern Sir Leicester Dedlock. I will know where they are. I
manner, coming close to him, and communicating an extraordinary
if you look sharp. I know my business, and thats all Ive got to say


nature of your secret is. You are right. You couldnt do better."
laugh, and laying a bitter stress on the word "ladyship," Mrs.
light that she is a woman overwhelmed with injuries and wrongs, whom
with particularity express, but she knows that Jo was Mr. Snagsbys
friend of Mrs. Chadband, and the follower of Mr. Chadband, and the

call truly venerable, mind you!--with his wits sharpened, as I have
"When are we to hear more of this?" Mrs. Chadband sternly demands.
and the party retire as they came up. Mr. Bucket follows them to the
Sir Leicester seems to wake, though his eyes have been wide open, and
Mr. Bucket rings, goes to the door, briefly whispers Mercury, shuts


go and sit down upon that sofy."
head, to go and sit down upon that sofy."
state, with her hands clenched--and her feet too, one might
I say till its given in evidence. It is not addressed to you."
"Well, Sir Leicester Dedlock," proceeds Mr. Bucket, "this intemperate
unfortunate stationer."
might be, notwithstanding, and there was enough against him to make
Lord it flashed upon me, as I sat opposite to her at the table and
and told her all about it. My dear, dont you give your mind to that

well as she could speak on account of the sheet, Bucket, I can! And
Leicester Dedlock, if I may take the liberty of throwing it towards
dreadful right of property in mademoiselle. Secondly, that the very
rest of that leaf, and when Mrs. Bucket puts the pieces together and
rose against her malice towards her ladyship, and the time was
she was rather a long time gone and came back a little out of wind.
"Shes gone forrard to the Police Office," returns Mr. Bucket.

Mr. Bucket answers, "Not exactly."
It is but the death, it is all the same. Let us go, my angel. Adieu,
those inarticulate sounds, lifts up his eyes and seems to stare at
honoured, and set up for the world to respect. It is she who, at the
CHAPTER LV
Preparations are afoot, measurements are made, ground is staked out.
is too thoughtful of her comfort to admit of her proposing it. The
"Never, my dear!" returns Mrs. Rouncewell, bursting into tears. "My
to see him after all, and in a prison too! And the broad stomacher
George, shaking his head, what I have done has been done this many a
Lignum, thats his mother for five and for-ty pound!"
himself of a charge of which he is as innocent as you or me. It wont
impression on Mrs. Bagnet and would astonish her but that she refers
But when they set out for the prison where the trooper is
housekeeper looks at him, and those wandering hands of hers are quite

that time the old girl, turned away, leans one arm against the

thought I would write home next year, when I might be better off; and
respected and esteemed. There was my brother, as I read in chance
"No, I dont say that it was so, mother, but that I made it out to be
mother, when I passed this in review before me: You have made your
down at Chesney Wold, when you little thought of me) but for my old
is released, or he will break her heart.
world beyond Chesney Wold, my dear, though I dont know much of it
this charge. How could a man like him be expected to have any
of it is recognized in Mrs. Bagnets face, his mother yields her
Matters being brought to this so far satisfactory pass, and time

the murdered man, and is sitting where she sat that night, and is
"Oh, my Lady, my Lady. I have found my son--my youngest, who went
"Lady Dedlock, my dear Lady, my good Lady, my kind Lady! You must

others, if you have any suspicion, if you have any clue at all, and
and pray you not to be scornful of us if you can do us any right or
reading the letter."
shot through the heart; and underneath is written her own name, with

communicated to me, after I had the pleasure of waiting on your
particularly request your ladyship to take particular notice that
difficult for me to be sure that I hadnt inadvertently led up to
wasnt easy to keep ones hands off his ead. However, what with the
at the corner of the square till they came out, and took half an

he has been gone a little while, she rings her bell.
invisible accuser as the murderess of her enemy.


   for I am innocent of nothing else that you have heard,
   unworthy woman on whom you have wasted a most generous
Pursuit

short peck at this document and a blink with her head on one side at
languages, and all the dead, are as one to him.
he said that his words really had come to sound as if there were
this morning. Right thankful she is that she happened to come to
to quiet him, but he points again with increased agitation. On their
write he cannot remember. His anxiety, his eagerness, and affliction
high estate to place his sole trust and reliance upon this man.
"Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, Ill find her. But my search after
the light, is giddy with the swiftness of his eyes and hands as he
Hes discharged honourable; thats about what HE is; with no more
With this peroration, Mr. Bucket, buttoned up, goes quietly out,
have been hard put to it!"
"Hum! Lets have a look at YOU," says Mr. Bucket, putting down the
coach-stand, picks out the horse for his money, and directs to be
stops the horse half smothers him in a cloud of steam.
"You wont repent it, George. Good night!"
ago. Not a moment to lose. Matter of life or death. You know Lady
pound an hour to have got the start of the present time. Now, Mr.
charged to find her. I am Inspector Bucket. Besides all the rest
This is all true, and the pressing nature of the case cannot be
perceives, in nooks of bridges, looking over; and in shadowed places
lonely figure with the sad world to itself, pelted by the snow and
door of my room and begged me to get up directly. On my hurrying to
with the secret. In taking me to him my guardian told me this, and
any one, no matter where, in whom she might be at all likely to
We had not driven very far from our lodgings when we stopped in a
very accurate indeed.
I told him I cared for no weather and was warmly clothed.
confidence in his sagacity which reassured me. It was not yet a
dense neighbourhood of narrow thoroughfares chequered by docks and
it was like the horror of a dream. A man yet dark and muddy, in long
cast my mother at the horses feet.
more on the alert than before. He stood up to look over the parapet,
length from the pavement on to dark smooth roads and began to leave
was a light (they were not a few at that time, the road being
I thanked him and said I hoped so.
catch half a crown in your tother hand. One, two, three, and there
day was now breaking--and reminded me that I had come down it one
out to look after him yourself, for I was aware of you and your
an afternoon of it to warn him to keep out of it now he WAS away, and
Although I remember this conversation now, my head was in confusion
kitchen-door, you give that young man in charge on suspicion of being
Skimpole. Not John, I should say, nor yet Jacob?"
be all the better for not running on one point too continually, and
money. Of course I understood what his taking it so easy meant; and
Ill give you a piece of advice that your husband will find useful
I believe it had not been for a moment out of his mind, any more than
me and who came out when I was trying to make some one hear informed

"And who told YOU as there was anybody here?" inquired Jennys
hand upon its broken back, looking at me. I thought she would have
latter turned his shaggy head towards me.

"Wos Jenny here when the lady come? Yes, she wos here when the lady
heerd it all, and see it all. He knows."
lady looked."
"Go on!" said the husband in answer to her look. "Tell her and cut it
my leave. The woman looked full at Mr. Bucket as he went out, and he

sure would have resisted no entreaty of mine.

companions better sense, however, I remained where I was. All this

and dont you worry yourself no more than you can help. Get on, my
one long weary stage. I overheard that he began to ask the drivers of
be down-hearted, he told me, for it was as likely as not that the
heavily swinging; on the other side to a wood of dark pine-trees.
tremble lest they should detain me there that she soon recalled her
the youngest daughter--a blooming girl of nineteen, who was to be the
the carriage; and every now and then he turned it upon me to see that

"Up?" said I, astonished. "To London! Are we going back?"
alive here with them horses. Send a man forard in the saddle to the
I endeavoured to say that I knew he was far more capable than I of

Still impassive, as behoves its breeding, the Dedlock town house
peachy-cheeked charmers with the skeleton throats is already apprised
where to have the fashionable people and how to bring what they
business to study my high connexion and to be able to wind it up like
How was it? She is discussed by her dear friends with all the
Sladderys high connexion, people who know nothing and ever did know
enemy is very hard with him. He is never asleep, though sometimes he
fast that he is obliged to close his eyes for a minute on the giddy


"Are these her rooms?"
where Mr. Bucket last night made his secret perquisition, the traces
being supposed to know (and indeed not knowing) what is the matter,

Boredom, soon indicates the approach of that monster with a series of
Sir Leicester breaks silence with a harsh cry. "George? Your son
"Why did you not tell me, Mrs. Rouncewell?"

He is lying thus, apparently forgetful of his newer and minor
difficulty, "I see something of a boy at Chesney Wold--I remember
strength. Thank you."
Leicester, that I am not much to boast of."
to pass one hand down one side, "and confuses," touching his lips.
in lifting him up, and Sir Leicester is slow in drawing it away again
with far greater plainness than could have been supposed possible a
his arms folded and his head a little bent, respectfully attentive.
surrounded, not to have her enemies and traducers, I dare say. Let it
gentleman. In such a light both aspire alike, both rise alike, both
gloom augments; the bright gas springs up in the streets; and the
His old housekeeper is the first to understand that he is striving to
"Not so very long, Sir Leicester. Not twenty-four hours yet."

The corporation of servants are dismissed to bed (not unwilling to
planted with dried-up shrubs like antediluvian specimens of black
impressed from her own bed for that purpose, extremely cold, very
genius the maid.
"It is indeed, miss. Hadnt you better go to bed?"
But when it comes to four oclock, and still the same blank,
house to himself.
and of his rustic boyhood, and of the two periods of his life so

and vague, it sends a warning streak before it of a deathlike hue, as
than when we had traversed them by daylight, both the fall and the
Islington.
carriage itself, and giving them some brief direction where to take
"Now, my dear," said Mr. Bucket, with his head in at the window after
know, thats what you are," said Mr. Bucket warmly; "youre a
was prepared for our descending into a deeper complication of such
nodding from time to time. When it was finished he came to me looking
street, I thought I knew the place. "Are we in Holborn?" I asked him.

"Why, you see, Mr. Woodcourt"--he had caught the name from me--"we

His friendly and familiar way of speaking of them, his unaffected
"Indeed, sir?" said Mr. Bucket. "Then you will be so good as to let
"At all events, they wouldnt be up yet if it wasnt for her, Mr.

done to bring her round. She has a letter somewhere that I

unlikely that you may inquire of me why Inspector Bucket, Mr.

Shell find that out sooner than will be agreeable to a lady of her
all the time he talked he was listening for the discovery of the

Mrs. Snagsby shook her head and put her handkerchief to her eyes.
Woodcourt came in, put a paper into his hand, and went away again.
paper, blotted with wet. Folded roughly like a letter, and directed
   she rendered on my strongest assurance that it was for the
   fatigue are sufficient causes for my being found dead, but
   with now. The place where I shall lie down, if I can get
The questions, Mr. Bucket said, were how she came by the letter, what
indeed I was crying too, and trembling, "it seems cruel to trouble
dark--quite late; and when I came home, I found a common-looking
she was so faint, and lame, and miserable, Oh so wretched, that if
As I watched her face and soothed her to go on, I saw that Mr. Bucket
Angry with her, poor soul!

clogged and bursting gutters and water-spouts, the mounds of
walls a thick humidity broke out like a disease. On the step at the
meaning to them in any other connexion.
not follow, and might be passing beyond our reach and help at that


"And in the meanwhile leave Bleak House?" said I.
"Not so disinterested either, my dear, if you mean to extol me for

"The more he suffers, the more averse he will be to me, having made
touched me so that I was always silent on this subject very soon.
of another separation from a friend. Therefore I have particularly
her very much and thought she was more agreeable than she used to be.

better."
to come out by and by, I thought I would go back to our last theme.
very deliberate manner. "About half a year hence or so, there is a
"Why, little woman," returned my guardian, smiling, "not being an
Bleak House. But it was the first time I had taken my seat at his
Sometimes I would meet him in the neighbourhood lounging about and
been at home, and a little quieter than I had thought natural when
you. And you are going to visit our interesting Jarndyce wards? TO be
to myself he is the most constant suitor in court. He begins quite to
I have reflected that if I should wear out, he will be able to watch





when they were both very young, I told him (a little indignantly) and
"It would become a very different marriage, a much happier and better
trust I am competent to perceive that she is a highly genteel young
desire that everything should be openly carried on--I used those
thank you very much, sir!"
restlessness that changed them altogether. I cannot use the
appear to be interesting to Mr. Vholes, though he occasionally made a
out. On his return he told us, more than once, that Vholes was a good
rising between whiles to bend over him and speak to him, when Mr.
Woodcourt. We have to thank you for that."
indeed. You shall teach me."
way as my husband and not pursue it all the more desperately for my
dear girl!
She stopped a minute. Stopped speaking only; her hand was still in
beautiful woman, his daughter, happily married, may be proud of him
weeping, she replied, "That he may not live to see his child."

Skimpole and how extremely likely it was that he would signally
I replied, half defeated already, that I wished to speak to himself
matter, how much less should you! So thats disposed of, and we will

it has occurred to me to take the liberty of saying that--if you
tradespeople always want them of me. Next, our young friends begin to
went to see our young friends in their present ill-regulated state of

whimsical expression of face, then quite gave it up and said in his
it was chiefly a question of money, do you know?"
"No," said he. "Not by anybody. I dont attach any value to money. I
impartiality with which he seemed to convince himself, as he tossed
have refused the note? Skimpole protests to Bucket, Whats this for?
again. If it is blameable in Skimpole to take the note, it is


there was no remote chance of the suit being mentioned, and became

of him. We agreed that he was either prevented from coming or that he
going away through the sunlight in the fresh bloom of their hope and


Dear Esther, let me only tell you that the fond idea of you which I

"If, in the unchanged intercourse we shall have together--in tending
"I have," he answered. "With such help from Mr. Jarndyce as you who

the compass of a life could express the feelings of a single day."
"Good night," I said, "Good-bye."
the beloved of his life and had said I would be evermore as dear to
I had not the courage to see any one that night. I had not even the
very notable. When my guardian appeared he said, "Why, little woman,

always put at his side--for sometimes I read to him, and sometimes I
"I am very glad indeed to hear that," I returned. "You know, you said
He still held me in the same protecting manner and with the same

shoulder. "Mr. Jarndyce and Miss Summerson," said he, rather out of
knows me, and his name is Smallweed. The discounting line is his line
occupied by Krook, marine store dealer--a relation of this
quite understanding him. His difficulty was increased by Mr.
"Of course I do," cried Mr. Smallweed.
Thats the drollery of it," said Mr. Bucket with the same lively air
your own."
about me, I may get into trouble regarding this will."
I think it would be impossible to make an admission with more ill
"Thats what was agreed," Mr. Smallweed assented with the same bad
let him lose by his honesty. Little by little he very slowly took
"Mr Bucket," said my guardian aloud, "whatever the worth of this
other parties interested."
papers. Chairs having been placed for us by Mr. Guppy, Mr. Kenge
desk and have done with it, let me tell you how it has come into my
opened and read a little of it through his eye-glass, he became
Mr. Jarndyce."
Richard Carstone, are very materially advanced by it."
here by me and look over this paper?"
Kenge.

on echoing a popular prejudice? We are a prosperous community, Mr.
Steel and Iron
looking about him and always looking for something he has come to
him.
chimneys, going on as straight as ever he can, and presently hell
axles, in wheels, in cogs, in cranks, in rails; twisted and wrenched
"Excuse me. Young Mr. Rouncewell, I believe?"
George, full of the idea of iron, in desperation answers "Steel," and
arm on his knee and his hat in his hand, and very chary of meeting
springing out of his eyes. "How do you do, my dear old fellow? I

the arrangements of which there is to be observed a pleasant mixture
evening in their floating muslins) waltzing, after the German manner,
"I am not sure that I understand you, George," replies the
back without it. I should never be safe not to be off again. I have
remain UNscratched, I think." There is an amused smile on the

"Well," he proceeds, throwing off his disappointment, "next and last,
it so falls out, on the other hand, that I am able to be of some
dont say much about my garrison manners because I found myself

   A communication having been made to me by Inspector Bucket
   supposed a certain unfortunate gentleman to have been in
   all others far beyond the limits of the present dispatch.
Therefore it is sealed and deposited for posting among the iron

knew very well of course, I arranged my wardrobe to please him and
first knew her. There was no trouble she would not have taken to have
Jarndyce. Which of us was right will soon appear, but I certainly did
all my new clothes, looking at them all around me and thinking, when
begun to fear (the more so as his letter was a very short one) that
wont wait until to-morrow to tell you. I have very much wished to
Because he was so dear, so good, so admirable. I tried to tell him

and flowers at home.
flying from a white tent that rippled in the sweet west wind. And
did not wish him to forget me--perhaps he might not have done so,
name?"
need not ask myself. I did renew it, and I wrote my letter, and you
gently to him. "I am your guardian and your father now. Rest
dear girls virtues unobserved and unhonoured; I would not have her
so entirely, so religiously, that you should never suspect it though
"One more last word. When Allan Woodcourt spoke to you, my dear, he
wife that ever man had. What more can I say for you than that I know
shall be found about here somewhere. Its a west wind, little woman,
side, for I did not like to think of its being empty so soon.


of my articles at Kenge and Carboys, and I believe with satisfaction
put her handkerchief to her mouth, and again winked at me--"and a few

circles, fully backs me in the intentions I am now developing."
At which time Miss Summersons conduct was highly genteel; I may even
acceptance."

wouldnt hear of it. "Why, get along with you," said she to my
"Go along and find somebody thats good enough for you," repeated
against her will, downstairs, her voice rising a stair higher every
hopes of the will to be in a flutter about it, Allan and I agreed to
Ada, I heard somebody calling "Esther! My dear Esther! Esther!" And
that I came off laughing, and red, and anything but tidy, and looking
quite doubled themselves up with laughter, and went stamping about

too.
indomitable singularity of opinion?--might have been strengthened,

"Very well indeed, sir," returned Mr. Kenge with a certain
is found to have been absorbed in costs?"


darling heard my footsteps, she came out into the small passage and

feet. Ada would contrive to take him, somehow, he said. "Yes, surely,
that some one was there.
"I am very weak, sir, but I hope I shall be stronger. I have to begin
recover my strength, I feel as if I should get well there sooner than
He clasped her in his arms, and none of us spoke. He gradually
"And you will come there too, I hope, Rick. I am a solitary man now,


weeping to me and told me she had given her birds their liberty.
certain that the handsome Lady Dedlock lies in the mausoleum in the
among the trees, comes sometimes to this lonely spot the sound of
aggrieved by, that Mr. Boythorn found himself under the necessity of
In one of the lodges of the park--that lodge within sight of the
observe--which few do, for the house is scant of company in these
drawing-room for all that, and reposes in his old place before my
and no Buffy, or saved by being all Buffy and no Boodle (it must be
the old places of appointment for low-spirited twos and threes of
condescension, by her girlish vivacity, and by her skipping about as
overgrown house looking out upon trees, sighing, wringing their
vacancy; with so little change under the summer shining or the wintry

was mighty to do it. When I saw the strength of the weak little hand

did half an hour ago, since little Emma, Charleys sister, is exactly
house with his head against the wall as he used to do in her old one.
Peepy and old Mr. Turveydrop. Peepy is in the Custom House, and doing
good man. To Ada and her pretty boy, he is the fondest father; to me
very day.
people bless him. I never go into a house of any degree but I hear
sitting out in the porch of all places, that dearly memorable porch,
have loved me any better, even if I had retained them."
very beautiful, and that my husband is very handsome, and that my
