PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
of some one or other of their daughters.


“I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may send


thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.”

“We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes,” said her mother


nonsense!”
“I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me that before? If

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper
The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the
was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
dance.”

playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife’s views on
and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again,
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.
her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how very
could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help

the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it for
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one
disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town;
That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over
I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson’s asking him how he liked our Meryton
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.”
Chapter 6
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they
enough to make her understand his character.”
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardly
assembled.

a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would
Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
“What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There

He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposed
Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of
Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not
agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”
Mr. Bennet’s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;
felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and
next morning to London.
“My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
for an answer. Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was


were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
“I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be

when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.”
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
to the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to
above her ankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! What could she mean by
such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is



“And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying


I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being
“Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it.”
I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.”
“Elizabeth Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her,
immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could

would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried
“that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while she
“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I

observed in them for ever.”
and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each their

“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For
sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to
affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high
would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball,” she
The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss


Grantley’s.”
brother, “because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much for
indirect boast.”

not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much

friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make
“By all means,” cried Bingley; “let us hear all the particulars, not
and want to silence this.”
seated herself.
Elizabeth, said to her:

their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.
lines. As for your Elizabeth’s picture, you must not have it taken, for

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of
entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh

could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult

succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked
two motives.
as you are, you must know how it is to be done.”
actions--may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in
“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real
so soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelings
them.”
In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
Bingley was uncivil to _her_, and more teasing than usual to himself.
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of
for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in--and I hope _my_ dinners
eagerly questioned by his wife and his five daughters at once.
Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail. They

received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to be
amends--but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
“He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. This
“I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and
good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He
his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
extensive property.”
“Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at
“You judge very properly,” said Mr. Bennet, “and it is happy for you

about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.”
resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his
acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had
This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father’s
not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession; her
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and
him the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a
on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the
invitation.
excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.
attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so

the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.

even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly
Elizabeth could not but look surprised.
anywhere else. Here you are in your own family.”

be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by
“which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I knew it to be
living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done
have induced him to behave so cruelly?”
After a few minutes’ reflection, however, she continued, “I _do_
“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest
motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest--for
to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the
education.”
“Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not
that she would not make herself uneasy.
notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”
self-destined for another.

that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage
done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each,
“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
think.”
the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet
less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they
he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’s
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being
was extremely agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not choose

pleasure in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though
was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away


about the dance, and _you_ ought to make some sort of remark on the size
trouble of saying as little as possible.”
“I must not decide on my own performance.”
“He has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship,” replied Elizabeth
her sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then
are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”

to be secure of judging properly at first.”
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”
“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham!
Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really,
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of
principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,
them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last


Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying
placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find
such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.

had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no
weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an
family.” And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had
and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the
She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy’s further notice;
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next
Chapter 19


soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of
to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the

thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus


To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make
the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
brought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a very
we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”
“Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,
you an offer of marriage. Is it true?” Elizabeth replied that it was.
Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning,
in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined
made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.”
she can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy--if you take it
them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room with
Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked his
My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged

their way to town--and without any intention of coming back again. You
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley’s being there; and as
“When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which

unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have

Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the
anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceiving

so totally independent of everyone.
conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he had
very amiable, but Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas

gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were
when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and
“You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than her
understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her
she could not help crying out:
their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her
It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so

Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while

on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised
Mr. Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
falsehood.
an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her
anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour,
better things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor.”
“I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How
time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left
for her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline’s
observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be
nothing.
deserve.”
other is Charlotte’s marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it is
conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as
to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but
“And do you impute it to either of those?”
may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great
the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”
Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he one day,



done she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
her, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent.”
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time
of her sister’s ready acquiescence.

Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and the
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and
character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject
Mrs. Gardiner’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given
“My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”
me the greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My
“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: “very
now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think

it should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never

“I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was very
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the
receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that
He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she said
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.
with believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune
towards _him_; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find

to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement
was a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to
as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner’s
to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get
poor?”
“No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,

first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of
The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth
family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the
eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but
the country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the
forgotten.
_should_ say, one of her ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with
and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in

the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two
Catherine’s condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.
Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their
While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different

apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.
believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented.
and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth
between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was
sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no
you draw?”
“We never had any governess.”
idle, certainly might.”

“Upon my word,” said her ladyship, “you give your opinion very decidedly
When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tables
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,

Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by
“I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and

Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had seen
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment
“So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find

Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.”
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.
Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance, mixing
be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her

very little of his time there in the future. He has many friends, and
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the

the present distance.”
them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
Chapter 33
her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her

arranges the business just as he pleases.”
wherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a fancy for?”
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, “And pray, what
divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.”
Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”

“Did Mr. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?”
cousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?”
of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, and

importance in his friend’s connections, than from their want of sense;

shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave her
the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.
doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement;
answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with
bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to
I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at
continued:


and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and
just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
would have tempted me to accept it.”
Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best
unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable
Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk,
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written

and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which
attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss
are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe
representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to
of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I
town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her
than one witness of undoubted veracity.
careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape
wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders,
For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the

excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed
false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Mr.
the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.

was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she
the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
to his real character, had information been in her power, she had
Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; he had
actions been what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
and manner not often united with great sensibility.
by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she
till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern
brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship,
dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy
“I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation,” replied
Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room
Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with
which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so
or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past
forever.


yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her
“But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble respects

Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet’s carriage
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
go too of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall
“Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the
“I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never cared
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane

_me_--I should infinitely prefer a book.”
She had not been many hours at home before she found that the Brighton
surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene
other feelings, which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here
“I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. “Wickham so

the matter as you do now.”
Wickham’s character.”
present I will say nothing about it.”
this last encumbrance of mystery. “And then,” said she, “if that very

die of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he has done.”
take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressed

Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what

their _three_ months’ acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.
her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from

wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
disgrace?”
many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the rest
She saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them
home.
and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.
“How long did you say he was at Rosings?”
to his ordinary style?--for I dare not hope,” he continued in a lower
Wickham’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated
am certain he has very much at heart.”
and impressive in her injunctions that she should not miss the
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in
father’s behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but
sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around
for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by
present plan, were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire. In that
owner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his county with impunity,
a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed
richly furnished,” said she, “I should not care about it myself; but
the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question--and her

had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural
room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw the
“I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Mrs. Gardiner,
“I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs you
comes here to-morrow with him.”

Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was

him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw
the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss
sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.
She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,
to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her having stayed in
thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes
reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time
aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it.
they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared
This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared;
some relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most
manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a
left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected
during your stay at Lambton?”

pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.
disagreeable?”
should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by
Wickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally
Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
inquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and looked
to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a
It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself;
self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of
But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s curiosity; it was
hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion;
her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most
It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that
Chapter 45
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.


was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded
confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what
for the welfare of his friend.
err. And he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana
“For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never could

Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their
Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been
“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a
twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at
head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest
I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that
be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she
measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to
“Good God! what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than
present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”


gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her
compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, “I am afraid you have been
reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only
a first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
as this she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not suppose
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a
everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of
drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much
Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to believe
“Well, then--supposing them to be in London. They may be there, though
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year,
their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt,
what he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,
neighbourhood had of him should then be overthrown? And even when it was
the first two months; but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular
on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day. It was a
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been
again till he had something of importance to mention.”
of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the

“Oh! my dear brother,” replied Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what I
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well
before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The
false step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no less
I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel
their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not


“You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
drink to our good journey.

fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either of them.
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.

information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting,
All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months
letter from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had immediately
know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were
was a something to look forward to.
“MY DEAR SIR,
proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time,
own heinous offense.
very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a

received none since her return that could come from Pemberley.



spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.”
coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call them to their
seeking him up stairs with their mother, when they were met by the

“MY DEAR BROTHER,
not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure
Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the


“Money! My uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?”
“Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be
thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children
“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,” said

would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her
Gardiner’s behaviour laid them all under.




regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet
another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have as
good-natured wishes for her well-doing which had proceeded before from
importance.
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. The

she could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could
considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on
and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment,
with everybody, and had so many favourites.
mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show
probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to
to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy with an
were always so pleasing, that had his character and his marriage been
the world.
he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.”

“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.
having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to
occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did every
married, you know, at St. Clement’s, because Wickham’s lodgings were in
fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure London was
them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!”
it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems

“I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning
Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were,
of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us.
afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he
must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have
“Every thing being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy’s next step was to
Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that
at most.

serious manner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had
slyness seems the fashion.
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
was insufficient, when required to depend on his affection for her--for
encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For

“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much

“Very much.”


mind.”
The day of his and Lydia’s departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was
Mr. Wickham’s adieus were much more affectionate than his wife’s. He
single.”
Phillips first brought her the news). “Well, so much the better. Not
colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to
there _with_ his friend’s permission, or being bold enough to come
“As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “you

but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she

Mr. Bingley’s will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must
information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted

not an improbable, conjecture.
was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but
She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.
It was my brother Gardiner’s drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to

hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt
as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no
Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that
better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.

hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was
no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table
and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the
“The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them;

When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the ladies
I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The
humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at
pleasing, than any other man.”

give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.

impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last


or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into
have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but _hers_ she
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not
previous months of suspense and vexation.
her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed
each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so
ever was seen!”



“If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as

continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown
high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting
“You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine after a short
“Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.”
her face.
know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere _you_ may
so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?”


Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:
be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to
attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father’s, from respectable,
condition.”
“And will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?”
supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the


the scorn.”
impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady

sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours
was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_,
it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his
“Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you; come into my room.”

which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate
life! It is admirable!”
to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and
look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be _missish_,
about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”

They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon
mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner

been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the
from her nephew which she had refused to give. But, unluckily for her
behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was

contents?”

arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception.

hour after I had seen you.”
it was time to be at home.
“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a
“From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two visits

which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room,

“You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot. Perhaps I
Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?”

I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you,
“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next
hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?”
to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to

accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”
“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape
you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”
at last to go--saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come
what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a
Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself,
in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to

did you admire me for my impertinence?”
of _that_ when they fall in love.”

springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the
“My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I

great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again,
“I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon
insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it

longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters’ beauty and her own,

frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an
occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself
an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of
resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity


doing just what she liked; highly esteeming Miss Taylor’s judgment, but
a long evening. Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner, as
Isabella’s marriage, on their being left to each other, was yet a

Highbury, the large and populous village, almost amounting to a town,
habits of gentle selfishness, and of being never able to suppose that
own?”

sure she will make a very good servant: she is a civil, pretty-spoken


congratulations; but I hope it all went off tolerably well. How did you
sigh. “I am afraid I am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome.”
reflection on any body. Miss Taylor has been used to have two persons
Emma turned away her head, divided between tears and smiles. “It

promise to his wife on her deathbed, and others of the son and the
if, which I rather imagine, your making the match, as you call it, means
not have come to any thing after all. I think you must know Hartfield
Highbury who deserves him--and he has been here a whole year, and has
thing. Invite him to dinner, Emma, and help him to the best of the fish
into the militia of his county, then embodied.
to her in return for the great goodness of being in love with him;
mother’s, been the means of a sort of reconciliation; and Mr. and Mrs.
life passed cheerfully away. He had, by that time, realised an easy
even in his first marriage; but his second must shew him how delightful
had made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too. He was looked on as
mother on the occasion. For a few days, every morning visit in Highbury
who could ill bear to part with her.
Weston, and of moments only of regret; and her satisfaction--her more
different from himself. What was unwholesome to him he regarded as unfit
seen with a slice of Mrs. Weston’s wedding-cake in their hands: but Mr.
such as would visit him on his own terms. Fortunately for him, Highbury,
After these came a second set; among the most come-at-able of whom were
make atonement to herself, or frighten those who might hate her into

after her to church. She was a plain, motherly kind of woman, who
As she sat one morning, looking forward to exactly such a close of the

Encouragement should be given. Those soft blue eyes, and all those

He loved to have the cloth laid, because it had been the fashion of his
our small eggs will not hurt you. Miss Bates, let Emma help you to a
with her at last!
her exercise had been too much confined. She had ventured once alone to
never be granted. Two such she did not want. It was quite a different
the school in general, formed naturally a great part of the
summer-house in their garden, where some day next year they were all to
With this inspiriting notion, her questions increased in number and
to be a better son, and therefore she was sure, whenever he married, he
“Oh yes!--that is, no--I do not know--but I believe he has read a
first, but I do not think him so plain now. One does not, you know,
but he knows you very well indeed--I mean by sight.”


“You understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet; but I would
if he marries a very ignorant, vulgar woman, certainly I had better not
neat, and he looked like a sensible young man, but his person had no
most days. He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet.
“I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us, you have been

awkwardness becomes. What is passable in youth is detestable in later
else--which is just as it should be, for a thriving man. What has he to
be copied. Neither would Mr. Knightley’s downright, decided, commanding

as a good-humoured, well-meaning, respectable young man, without any

seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure. How very differently
one of her own sex, after being used to it all her life. I can imagine
requiring industry and patience, and a subjection of the fancy to the
quick and assured: Isabella slow and diffident. And ever since she
very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will, and doing
“Not I, indeed. I only name possibilities. I do not pretend to Emma’s
to the varieties of her situation in life.--They only give a little
old friend.”
Harriet Smith, or my dread of its doing them both harm.”
with me.”
“Not at all,” cried he; “I am much obliged to you for it. It is very
“She always declares she will never marry, which, of course, means just
and Mr. Weston’s on the subject, as much as possible. There were wishes
Elton’s being a remarkably handsome man, with most agreeable manners;
infinitely superior to what she received from nature.”

“Oh! dear, no, never.”
in favour of your friend. I know what your drawings are. How could
it will indeed, to use your own words, be an exquisite possession.”
displayed. Miniatures, half-lengths, whole-lengths, pencil, crayon, and
would have been the same. They were both in ecstasies. A likeness
them might do for any one of the rest. She was so eager to have them
thinking it _very_ like)--only too handsome--too flattering--but
consciousness, that Emma began to consider whether she had not better
it, and request him to place himself elsewhere. It then occurred to her

“By all means. We shall be most happy to consider you as one of the
“Do you think so?” replied he. “I cannot agree with you. It appears
“It is very pretty,” said Mr. Woodhouse. “So prettily done! Just as your
Smith’s manners--and altogether--Oh, it is most admirable! I cannot keep
“He was too good!--she could not endure the thought!--she would not give
being in love. He is an excellent young man, and will suit Harriet
talked of, and with an agitated, hurried look, announcing something

forced to add, “Is it a good letter? or is it too short?”
“Well,” said the still waiting Harriet;--“well--and--and what shall I
being intelligible, which is the first thing. Your meaning must be
Harriet was silent. With a little reserve of manner, Emma continued:
“I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman _doubts_ as
either way. You must be the best judge of your own happiness. If you
as I can by myself; and I have now quite determined, and really almost
forcibly.
“Dear affectionate creature!--_You_ banished to Abbey-Mill Farm!--_You_
to leaving you, it is what I would not do upon any consideration.”
how shall I do? What shall I say?”
was finished, and Harriet safe. She was rather low all the evening, but
surprized if she knew what had happened. I am sure Miss Nash would--for
cheering; but still, after a time, she was tender-hearted again towards
“Has he so!--Then I know nothing of Mr. Elton. No, my dear little modest

decided answers, an amusing contrast to the protracted apologies and
“You cannot do better, sir.”
“I cannot rate her beauty as you do,” said he; “but she is a

“I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell you that
“I have reason to think,” he replied, “that Harriet Smith will soon have
(especially since _your_ making so much of her) as in a line of society
Goddard’s to-day; and she may be detained by a visitor, without thinking
Knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasure, as he stood

Harriet Smith’s claims, either of birth, nature or education, to any
good hands, like his, might be easily led aright and turn out very well.
very different. I must think your statement by no means fair. You are
comfort.--That she is a gentleman’s daughter, is indubitable to me; that
friend to Harriet Smith, Emma. Robert Martin would never have proceeded
understanding spoken of so slightingly. Waiving that point, however, and
a woman could possess.”
“I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy,” said Mr. Knightley
to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence and large
favour him, she is not now. I can imagine, that before she had seen
did not repent what she had done; she still thought herself a better

“I am very much obliged to you,” said Emma, laughing again. “If I had
her opinions were right and her adversary’s wrong, as Mr. Knightley. He
that Mr. Knightley could not have observed him as she had done, neither
did not belong to Mr. Elton.
_particular_ way indeed, that he was going on business which he would
CHAPTER IX
her youth and sort of mind admitted. Emma was soon perfectly satisfied

His good friend Perry, too, whom he had spoken to on the subject,

stopt a moment--“or Miss Smith could inspire him.”
moment:--after another moment’s pause,
      Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!
charades. _Courtship_--a very good hint. I give you credit for it. This
you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken. An excellent charade

    My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,
A very proper compliment!--and then follows the application, which
the subject have been ever since I knew you. Yes, Harriet, just so long
arrive at something more like conversation, it was sufficiently clear to

      The course of true love never did run smooth--
was going by, and Miss Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to look

“I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour. Such things
“Such sweet lines!” continued Harriet--“these two last!--But how shall I
“Oh! but those two lines are”--
of publicity.
quick, and appear to affix more meaning, or even quite all the meaning
piece of paper was found on the table this morning--(dropt, we suppose,
tender sigh, he added,
the way through. But I think, my dear, you said you had got it.”
has;--and there is the nursery for the children,--just as usual, you
here.”

by the idea of his daughter’s attachment to her husband, she immediately
is named after his father. Some people are surprized, I believe, that

inimitable charade walked in again. Harriet turned away; but Emma could

approbation while he writes with such gallantry.”

very good house, almost as close to the road as it could be. It had
of Highbury.”
going to be married! so charming as you are!”--
must expect to repent it.”

as any body else. And the distinction is not quite so much against the
“If I know myself, Harriet, mine is an active, busy mind, with a great

They were now approaching the cottage, and all idle topics were
these poor creatures all the rest of the day; and yet, who can say how
They walked on. The lane made a slight bend; and when that bend was
accompany them.
footpath, begged them to have the goodness to walk on, and she would
a little more, when they both looked around, and she was obliged to join
They now walked on together quietly, till within view of the vicarage
exceed his alertness and attention in conducting them into his house and
favourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma felt the glory of having


the sixteen miles being happily accomplished, and Mr. and Mrs. John
Mrs. John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle, quiet
character; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally
compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of

life--never looking so well. Papa is only speaking his own regret.”
you will be giving Isabella a false idea of us all. Every body must be
often--but then--she is always obliged to go away again.”
the misery of her leaving Hartfield, I should never have thought of Miss
“He has not been here yet,” replied Emma. “There was a strong
exceeding good, pretty letter, and gave Mr. and Mrs. Weston a great deal
what you would feel in giving up Henry or John. Mr. Weston is rather

to make up. Making-up indeed would not do. _She_ certainly had not been
“What a comfort it is, that we think alike about our nephews and nieces.
“A material difference then,” she replied--“and no doubt you were much

seemed all but indifference, the real attachment which would have led
anecdote to give; and as a farmer, as keeping in hand the home-farm at
interrupting, for a few moments, her busy labours for some one of her


you had better let him look at little Bella’s throat.”
them in most of your letters. I hope they are quite well. Good old Mrs.
altogether a sickly season.”
hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my children in:
assure you Mr. Wingfield told me, that he did not believe he had ever



it, she had never been able to get any thing tolerable. Here was a
great deal of good.”
sea-bathing places. A fine open sea, he says, and very pure air. And, by
Emma’s attempts to stop her father had been vain; and when he
“True, true,” cried Mr. Knightley, with most ready interposition--“very
the immediate alertness of one brother, and better recollections of the
In general their evenings were less engaged with friends than their
only persons invited to meet them;--the hours were to be early, as

proceeded together. Emma was just describing the nature of her friend’s
could not wish to reason away, which she would rather feed and assist
which was exactly the case; for though very much gratified by the kind
objection, and Mr. Elton actually accepting the offer with much prompt
out wherever he is asked. What a strange thing love is! he can see ready
“I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr.
be Mr. Elton’s object?”
partial knowledge of circumstances, of the mistakes which people of high
in a very short time.
people to be comfortable at home--and the folly of people’s not staying
Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased assent, which no
been, “Much the same--not better.”
Emma smiled and answered--“My visit was of use to the nervous part of
when only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things,
“Christmas weather,” observed Mr. Elton. “Quite seasonable; and

London, may not quite enter into our feelings.”
CHAPTER XIV
had not a lively concern; and half an hour’s uninterrupted communication
got to the end of his satisfaction that James should come and see his
for her being perfectly warm, would be so interested about her father,

imaginations.
telling the others in the drawing-room that we are expecting Frank.
“What a very great pleasure it will be to you! and Mrs. Weston is so
I have not the smallest doubt of the issue. I am as confident of seeing
any body, except herself: but she has always been kind to him (in her

compassion. To be constantly living with an ill-tempered person, must
whom he was always comfortable.
dependence on his coming, and I wish Mr. Weston were less sanguine.”
thing gives way to her.”
Emma listened, and then coolly said, “I shall not be satisfied, unless
companions could do, to entertain away his notice of the lateness of
lovely, amiable friend. “Did she know?--had she heard any thing about
proper course, there was no putting an end to his extreme solicitude
some right to complain? I am sure of your kind support and aid.”
Woodhouse:
I dare say we shall get home very well. Another hour or two’s snow can
consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house.

not so entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get away;
was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous

slow and wait for the other carriage.
immediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of
be drunkenness, and therefore could hope that it might belong only to
for it only in one way; you are not yourself, or you could not speak

sorry--extremely sorry--But, Miss Smith, indeed!--Oh! Miss Woodhouse!
“Charming Miss Woodhouse! allow me to interpret this interesting
“Never, madam,” cried he, affronted in his turn: “never, I assure you.
have been led into a misconception of your views; not being aware,
night. The compliment was just returned, coldly and proudly; and, under
usual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quiet reflection.
effects of her blunders have been confined to herself.
seemed to point at Harriet. To be sure, the charade, with its “ready
that those brothers had penetration. She remembered what Mr. Knightley
perfectly easy as to his not suffering any disappointment that need be
presumption in addressing her!--It was most provoking.
could, without any alliances but in trade, or any thing to recommend him
was adventuring too far, assuming too much, making light of what
disappointment so very much, I am sure I have not an idea of any body
gloom at night, the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of
three principals, and especially for her father’s being given a moment’s
with Harriet possible but by note; no church for her on Sunday any
her brother, whose feelings must always be of great importance to
weather soon improved enough for those to move who must move; and Mr.
leave of Mr. Woodhouse, of whose friendly civilities he should ever
sudden a journey, and his fears that Mr. Elton might never get safely to
grossly mistaken and mis-judging in all her ideas on one subject, all
Harriet’s side, not her own. Harriet did not consider herself as having
ignorant; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed of
to allow them all to meet again in the common routine of acquaintance,
Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place, was bad for
CHAPTER XVIII
sorry; but then he began to perceive that Frank’s coming two or three
as much interest in the circumstance, and enter as warmly into Mr.

for any thing but his own pleasure, from living with those who have
should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount. He cannot want
family may be. We ought to be acquainted with Enscombe, and with Mrs.
at once, in the tone of decision becoming a man, there would be no
good, raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the people he
ones. I can imagine, that if you, as you are, Mr. Knightley, were to be
understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly
extraordinary. I have not the least idea of his being a weak young man:
“Your feelings are singular. They seem to satisfy every body else.”
“You seem determined to think ill of him.”

at three-and-twenty to be the king of his company--the great man--the


to the poor!” she found something else must be done.
she seldom went near them. But now she made the sudden resolution of not
minutes, and had been so good as to sit an hour with them, and _she_ had
This she had been prepared for when she entered the house; but meant,
‘I know you cannot have heard from Jane lately, because it is not her
that I was almost sure it must be on the table. I was reading it to Mrs.
amazingly well still, thank God! with the help of spectacles. It is such
about Jane’s handwriting?”
mother’s time of life--and it really is full two years, you know, since
Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days. So very
going to Ireland. Mrs. Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to come
Colonel and Mrs. Campbell were very particular about their daughter’s
between her and Mrs. Dixon, you could hardly have expected her to be
had not, with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold of her habit--
compared with Miss Fairfax.”
months at Highbury will entirely cure her--and it is certainly a great
to do it, so I always do: and so I began to-day with my usual caution;


the foundling of her grandmother and aunt, there had seemed every
of her. He was a married man, with only one living child, a girl, about
respectable subsistence hereafter.
them, sharing, as another daughter, in all the rational pleasures of
acquainted; and was eligibly and happily settled, while Jane Fairfax had
their own comfort they would have retained her wholly; but this would
aunt contained nothing but truth, though there might be some truths
and less than she ought! Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a
by fancy, that she never saw Jane Fairfax the first time after any
cavil at, as wanting colour, had a clearness and delicacy which really
probable circumstance of an attachment to Mr. Dixon, which she had
afforded no young man worthy of giving her independence; nobody that she
They had music; Emma was obliged to play; and the thanks and praise
something more to conceal than her own preference; Mr. Dixon, perhaps,

“A very pleasant evening,” he began, as soon as Mr. Woodhouse had been
you are too attentive. The muffin last night--if it had been handed

Bates too, in a different way. I like old friends; and Miss Jane
thoughts were on the Bates’s, said--



Hawkins--that’s all I know. A Miss Hawkins of Bath. But, Mr. Knightley,


“is he--is he a tall man?”
fancied bathing might be good for it--the warm bath--but she says it did

“Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe, Miss Woodhouse,”

“Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be running away. The weather does
he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry--and to
Woodhouse, what do you think has happened!” which instantly burst forth,
set, without an idea of any thing in the world, full ten minutes,
you think he was, Miss Woodhouse?)--for presently she came forward--came
going to Hartfield, he thought I had much better go round by Mr. Cole’s
described it, there had been an interesting mixture of wounded affection
have behaved extremely well; and it is over--and may never--can never,
was over, she had talked herself into all the sensations of curiosity,


thrown himself away--he had gained a woman of 10,000 l. or thereabouts;
at--and, with cordial, fearless smiles, now addressing all the young
inseparably connected with some very disagreeable feelings, that,
for Mr. Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for Highbury--handsome
that he was in the law line; and with him the daughter had lived. Emma
reappearance of Mr. Elton. She was always having a glimpse of him
attached!--his air as he walked by the house--the very sitting of his
and wishing to do more than she dared to confess. But Mr. Elton, in
acquaintance. She meant to take her in the carriage, leave her at the
Small heart had Harriet for visiting. Only half an hour before her
She went on herself, to give that portion of time to an old servant who
saying, all of a sudden, that she thought Miss Smith was grown, had
the Martins in a higher rank of life. They were so deserving, that a
disappointed.” And she leaned back in the corner, to indulge her
enjoy him completely; every thing has turned out exactly as we could
as well as the route and the method of his journey; and she listened,
speaking a very different conviction.
something like a look of spring, a tender smile even there.
going again and again into his room, to be sure that all is right.”
before her--he was presented to her, and she did not think too much had
used to do myself. One cannot creep upon a journey; one cannot help
to have always felt the sort of interest in the country which none but
But when satisfied on all these points, and their acquaintance

 said Emma; “were you to guess her to be _eighteen_, I should listen with
agreeable.
now, without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise, without a
of paying a visit, which must be paid some day or other, and therefore
at Weymouth which--”
doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct sort
shew you the way.”

her usual hour of exercise; and on being desired to chuse their walk,
for it. But on seeing them together, she became perfectly satisfied. It
begged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so long, and
the principal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of post-horses
was long enough, broad enough, handsome enough. It would hold the
He seemed to have all the life and spirit, cheerful feelings, and social
me quite by surprize, it must have been the death of me. As it was, I
deplorable want of complexion.”

“Oh! yes, gloves and every thing. I do admire your patriotism. You will

Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man, and Mrs. Campbell a friendly,

of judging of any body’s performance.--I have been used to hear her’s
“Certainly--very strong it was; to own the truth, a great deal stronger
really did not seem to feel it.”
“There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all--”
never could attach myself to any one so completely reserved.”


CHAPTER VII
father and Mrs. Weston, indifferent as to how his conduct might appear
left to himself; and though there was no being attached to the aunt, he
harshly. As Mrs. Weston observed, “all young people would have their

their wealth, their views increased; their want of a larger house, their

possibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her spirits; and
London, which they hoped might keep Mr. Woodhouse from any draught of
in their afternoon walk; which they might do, as our hours are so
not lessening, Mr. Woodhouse’s agitation. The ladies knew better how
wanted on Tuesday. I shall have no fears for you with him. We have never
“And no great harm if it does,” said Mr. Woodhouse. “The sooner every
never touches malt liquor. You would not think it to look at him, but

which could be concealed.
been ashamed of it. There would have been either the ostentation of

independence, was too apt, in Emma’s opinion, to get about as he could,
beneath them. You think you carry it off very well, I dare say, but
and at dinner she found him seated by her--and, as she firmly believed,
received an amusing supply. Mrs. Cole was telling that she had been
surprized that there could ever have been a doubt. But Jane, it seems,
a shame, especially considering how many houses there are where fine
may be prevailed with to try it this evening.”
“I rather wonder that it was never made before.”
suspect whatever I find you suspect; but at present I do not see what
“Mr. Dixon.--Very well. Yes, I immediately perceive that it must be the
have passed; but what can any body’s native air do for them in the

in the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses, and
convinced you perhaps, but I am perfectly convinced myself that Mr.
usual rate of conversation; a few clever things said, a few downright
nothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour. Jane Fairfax

to her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient moments afterwards, heard
so abundant in agreeable families--that Emma began to feel she had been
home than he liked. His importance at Enscombe was very evident. He did
so fast. A week to-morrow!--And I have hardly begun to enjoy myself.
Fairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite.
front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.
“They walked, I conclude. How else could they come?”
carriage had brought, and was to take them home again.’ I was quite
more than on Mr. Knightley. I know he had horses to-day--for we arrived
no, Henry must have Donwell. I cannot at all consent to Mr. Knightley’s
know.”
“Imprudent, if you please--but not mad. Excepting inequality of fortune,

And, upon my word, I do not think Mr. Knightley would be much disturbed
love.”
Mrs. Cole told us of it at dinner.”
pressing entreaties; and as, in every respect, it suited Emma best to

marry. Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell.
“Quite out of the question, quite out of the question,” he
had no concern in giving the instrument. But whether he were

waltz; and Frank Churchill, coming up with most becoming gallantry to
it made it very delightful, and she found herself well matched in a

it difficult for her to be quite certain that she ought to have held her
than a lamp is like sunshine.”
“Ah! but Jane Fairfax has them both, Harriet.”
producing Mr. Elton.
“She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox should
very long at a purchase; and while she was still hanging over muslins
appeared; Mrs. Weston and her son-in-law; they were walking into
Frank Churchill, “to join your party and wait for her at Hartfield--if
But you had better go with Mrs. Weston and hear the instrument.”
you. It need not detain us long. We will go to Hartfield afterwards.
Mrs. Goddard will want to see it.--And I could take the pattern gown
take it home with me at night. What do you advise?”
to come with me, that I might be sure of succeeding.”
the world, fastening in the rivet of my mother’s spectacles.--The rivet
Only three of us.--besides dear Jane at present--and she really eats
last move out of the shop, with no farther delay from Miss Bates than,
excessively.’--Which you know shewed him to be so very.... Indeed I must
sort for baking, beyond a doubt; all from Donwell--some of Mr.
so liberal as he had been already; and Jane said the same. And when
than any thing; but Mrs. Hodges, he said, was quite displeased at their
“Pray take care, Mrs. Weston, there is a step at the turning. Pray take
standing with her back to them, intent on her pianoforte.
we have been wedging one leg with paper. This was very kind of you to be
Weston had been delighted before, and was delighted again; Emma
“It is not fair,” said Emma, in a whisper; “mine was a random guess. Do
He paused. She could not but hear; she could not avoid answering,
He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter; to escape a
She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and played something
there had been a smile of secret delight, she had less scruple in the
“I am very glad you did, and that you communicated it to me. I have now
in when he knows who is here. Quite delightful to have you all meet
“How is your niece, Miss Bates?--I want to inquire after you all, but

“No, not now, I thank you. I could not stay two minutes. I must get on
And (raising his voice still more) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should
should not have done it, indeed you should not. Ah! he is off. He never
long; and on examining watches, so much of the morning was perceived
must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more.
Mr. Weston could say of their exactly equal size, that it was a little
Yes, that will be quite enough for pleasure. You and Miss Smith, and

health. It made him so very unhappy, indeed, that it could not be
it, and said every thing in her power to do it away. Every door was now

self-willed, and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of
upon. May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances
consent?”
in his life--did not know the people who kept it by sight.--Oh! no--a
occasion to open the windows at all--not once the whole evening; and it
live out of the world, and am often astonished at what I hear. However,
complains; but it is right to spare our horses when we can. If I could
been very bad, but for Perry’s great attention. He came four times a day
engaging to think it all over while she was gone, the two young people
The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant, “Men never know
miserably crowded at supper.
mere nothing after all; and not the least draught from the stairs.”
she will be of any use.”
person for shewing us how to do away difficulties. Fetch Miss Bates.
a good wife, had examined the passage again, and found the evils of it
half-hour they were all walking to and fro, between the different rooms,
confidence, she could not think it so very impossible that the
seemed resolved that it should not interest him, determined against its

love.
to lessen his repugnance. He knew her illnesses; they never occurred but
Her father’s feelings were quite distinct. He thought principally of
to Randalls.”
“Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance. I would much
Do not we rather surpass your expectations? I am sure we do. I am sure
strengthened yours.”
what to say. It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutely

it. Oh! the blessing of a female correspondent, when one is really
attentions, his liveliness, his manners! It had been a very happy
others. I shall have many fellow-mourners for the ball, if not for Frank
was odious. She had been particularly unwell, however, suffering from
in seeing Mr. and Mrs. Weston; she was very often thinking of him, and
her previous and fixed determination never to quit her father, never
continue, I must be on my guard not to encourage it.--It would be most

once, and never without a something of pleasing connexion, either a
part, its sentiments, she yet found, when it was folded up and returned
the danger of indulging such speculations. But stranger things have
She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr. Elton; and Harriet’s
think about them any longer” but no change of subject could avail, and
“I have not said, exert yourself Harriet for my sake; think less, talk
loved extremely, made her wretched for a while, and when the violence
clearness of head in the world, for attraction, I am sure it will. It
Mrs. Elton was first seen at church: but though devotion might be
not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too; but
permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners. It was an
very charming?”
“I dare say,” returned Harriet, sighing again, “I dare say she was very
delightful!”
she would have connected him with those who were; but Miss Hawkins, it


“When you have seen more of this country, I am afraid you will think you
“My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring, or summer

bad thing; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world in
that it could not fail of being of use to Mr. Woodhouse’s spirits,
of Mrs. Elton’s--probably some vulgar, dashing widow, who, with the
performer!--very far from it, I assure you. Consider from how partial
_world_ I could give up--parties, balls, plays--for I had no fear of
I hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more than may be


“Having understood as much, I was rather astonished to find her so very
I had a great curiosity. ‘My friend Knightley’ had been so often
Actually to discover that Mr. Knightley is a gentleman! I doubt whether

“I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir. Mr. Elton knows you.”

CHAPTER XV
of congratulating himself on having brought such a woman to Highbury,
necessarily increasing Emma’s dislike. Her manners, too--and Mr.
recommend the other, but from the very first; and she was not satisfied
to do something for her. We must bring her forward. Such talent as hers
obscurity, so thrown away.--Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed
act. You and I need not be afraid. If _we_ set the example, many will
on the watch for an eligible situation. My acquaintance is so very
there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman’s tongue!”
was that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and tolerate Mrs.
promised their daughter to stay at least till Midsummer, and fresh
the few who knew her opinion of Mrs. Elton, Mrs. Weston ventured this
Emma felt that Mrs. Weston was giving her a momentary glance; and she
Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again; and after a few
prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action, if
Mr. Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick
enough to exclaim,

“In that respect how unlike dear Mrs. Elton, who wants to be wiser and
parties which are to take place in the barouche-landau.”
idea of _not_ being in love with her, that I should not wonder if it
Upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipated. We really seem quite
unbroken packs in the true style--and more waiters engaged for the
be asked to make the eighth:--but this invitation was not given with

so. Mr. Woodhouse considered eight persons at dinner together as the
must be absent on the very day. He might be able to join them in the
natural to have some civil hopes on the subject, and he said,
Mr. John Knightley smiled, and replied,
“Indifferent! Oh! no--I never conceived you could become indifferent.
body dearest to you always at hand, I, probably, never shall again;
in the eye, shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh. Her attention was
hope your good grand-mama and aunt are well. They are some of my very

reasonable. You look as if you would not do such a thing again.”

employ our men.”
hands too, that are to be deciphered, it increases the wonder.”
little teaching after an early age, and scramble into any hand they can
before all these people? Is it necessary for me to use any roundabout
letter about her to produce?” No, she had heard from him very lately,

She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the expedition and the
Jane Fairfax and slight herself. She and Mrs. Weston were obliged to
forward to the summer in general.”
Mr. Suckling, Mrs. Bragge, had such an infinity of applications; every
for any thing eligible.”
I am quite determined as to the time, I am not at all afraid of being
something that would do.”
be a little more nice, and I am sure the good Campbells will be quite
nothing to be done till the summer. For two or three months longer I
modern ease often disgusts me. But this good old Mr. Woodhouse, I wish
The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room when Mr.
evening of a cold sleety April day rush out again into the world!--Could
had not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body in
impatient as the black gentleman when any thing is to be done; most
agitation, which she rather thought was considerable.

“Oh! yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance. I am sure Mr.
married women must begin to exert ourselves!--Oh! Mr. Weston, I could
“Yes, upon my word, very considerable. Sixty-five miles farther than
must grant me that.”
Mrs. Elton eagerly interposed with,
this is quite between ourselves. She is very fond of Frank, and
seem shut out from every thing--in the most complete retirement.--And
Weston, with a very good grace, immediately exclaimed,
felt that something would happen in our favour; and so it has, you see.
seized the opportunity of going on.
having him actually in the house. I think it is so. I think it is the

them all in high and mighty claims: but in herself, I assure you, she is
direful in the sound: but nothing more is positively known of the
little disposed for conversation; Mrs. Elton was wanting notice, which
in my power to make them happy, which will be enough for Isabella; and

influence than heretofore, it strikes me as a possible thing, Emma, that
Mr. Knightley,) who know how very, very seldom I am ever two hours from

her:--caution for him and for herself would be necessary. She did
for a couple of hours; he could not yet do more; but as he came from
fluttered; there was restlessness about him. Lively as he was, it seemed
aunt could not bear to have him leave her. Such was his own account at
suffering; and by the ten days’ end, her nephew’s letter to Randalls
considering her as the source of all the happiness they offered. She
One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this
hoped that neither dear little Henry nor dear little John would have any
common meeting in a crowd. Mr. Weston had been so very earnest in his
like herself, by particular desire, to help Mr. Weston’s judgment; and
else to do, formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observe
have a great curiosity to see Mrs. Elton, I have heard so much of her.
The mistake had been slight. The carriage was sent for them now. Emma
pleased with him.--You may believe me. I never compliment. I think him
extremely expeditious!--I believe we drive faster than any body.--What
care for myself. Quite thick shoes. And Jane declares--Well!--(as soon
or we should have been.--But two such offers in one day!--Never were
you do?--Very well I thank you, quite well. This is meeting quite
this be?--very likely the worthy Coles.--Upon my word, this is charming
politeness. Mrs. Elton then said, “Nobody can think less of dress in
“Oh! you have found us out at last, have you, in our seclusion?--I was
smile--“No, do not tell me--I do not want to know what you mean.--Where
boasted himself an engaged man, which his father looked his most perfect
the standers-by, where he ought not to be; he ought to be dancing,--not
dancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour, she did not feel
wonder!--But Emma’s wonder lessened soon afterwards, on seeing Mr. Elton
just then took place between him and Mrs. Weston; and she perceived that

She would not look again. Her heart was in a glow, and she feared her
flew farther down the middle, and was in a continual course of smiles.
Weston begs you to put on your tippet. She says she is afraid there will
sir, you are too obliging.--Is there nobody you would not rather?--I am
but we agreed we would not speak of it to any body, for fear of
reprobation of Mr. Elton’s conduct; it had been unpardonable rudeness;

justice to say, that you would have chosen for him better than he has
“Whom are you going to dance with?” asked Mr. Knightley.

creature she had believed him. The fever was over, and Emma could
when the great iron sweep-gate opened, and two persons entered whom she
taken a road, the Richmond road, which, though apparently public enough
How the trampers might have behaved, had the young ladies been more
him to walk forward, and leave his horses to meet him by another road,
not stay longer than to see her well; these several delays left him
mind had already made.
Harriet had been partially insensible, he had spoken of her terror,
the place were soon in the happiness of frightful news. The last night’s
themselves off in a hurry. The young ladies of Highbury might have
and hesitating, thus began:
I dare say you understand me.”
have destroyed long ago--what I ought never to have kept--I know that
which Harriet opened: it was well lined with the softest cotton; but,
cut it smaller, and kept playing some time with what was left, before he
“And had you really some at hand yourself? I am sure I never suspected
Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure. It was the end of an
about spruce-beer.--Oh! yes--Mr. Knightley and I both saying we
“My poor dear Harriet! and have you actually found happiness in

moment’s debate, as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not, replied,
totally silent, it might only drive Harriet into asking her to hear too
“Oh! Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption to suppose--
honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.--But that
raising your thoughts to _him_, is a mark of good taste which I shall
Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings, and of the use
to Emma, and Emma herself making him over to Harriet, Mr. Knightley

obliging invitation.
“Indeed you did. I remember it perfectly. You mentioned it as what

premature. What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream!
mentioned it to my mother, and the Coles knew of it as well as
Jane; I wish I were. I will answer for it _she_ never betrayed the least
borne with, and Mr. Knightley must take his seat with the rest round the
was quickly scattered over with alphabets, which no one seemed so much
pushed away. If meant to be immediately mixed with the others, and
With great indignation did he continue to observe him; with great alarm
for darting his eye towards it, and it was not long before he saw it
night.”
in a situation of such danger, without trying to preserve her. It was
“The joke,” he replied gravely, “seemed confined to you and Mr.

“Oh! you amuse me excessively. I am delighted to find that you can
prolonged the conversation, wanting to hear the particulars of his
Suckling, the Highbury world were obliged to endure the mortification
need not be put off. Why should not they explore to Box Hill though
failed her, that the two parties should unite, and go together; and that
numbers. One cannot have too large a party. A large party secures its
for exploring!--These delays and disappointments are quite odious. What
and again to come--much oftener than he doubted--and was extremely

“Ah! you are an odd creature!” she cried, satisfied to have no one
your gardens, and gather the strawberries ourselves, and sit under

winter there is dirt.”
wished to persuade Mr. Woodhouse, as well as Emma, to join the party;
thought it very well done of Mr. Knightley to invite them--very kind
Box Hill was again under happy consideration; and at last Donwell was
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that as soon as she was
comfortable, and one or two handsome rooms.--It was just what it ought
gather for one’s self--the only way of really enjoying them.--Morning
fears of his horse.
before.--Still Mrs. Elton insisted on being authorised to write an
the house, which never had been there. Disputable, however, as might be
towards this view she immediately perceived Mr. Knightley and Harriet
a story.--Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of Harriet.--They
prevented coming.--Emma looked at Harriet while the point was under
shells, and every other family collection within his cabinets, had been
gone home?--I am going this moment.--My aunt is not aware how late it
father’s servant go with you.--Let me order the carriage. It can be
my own way, and only say that I am gone when it is necessary.”
accomplished some views of St. Mark’s Place, Venice, when Frank
“You will soon be cooler, if you sit still,” said Emma.
“No--he should not eat. He was not hungry; it would only make him
over views in Swisserland.
eyes may fancy--I am sick of England--and would leave it to-morrow, if

“But if I do, I shall be crosser still. I can never bear to think of you
“Well;--if _you_ wish me to stay and join the party, I will.”
the Eltons; the gentlemen on horseback. Mrs. Weston remained with Mr.

meant nothing, though in the judgment of most people looking on it must

“Perhaps I intended you to say so, but I meant self-command. You had,

Some laughed, and answered good-humouredly. Miss Bates said a great
should not have thought myself privileged to inquire into. Though,
are seven of you, besides myself, (who, she is pleased to say, am very
limited as to number--only three at once.”

indifferent piece of wit, but Emma found a great deal to laugh at and
place, in my opinion, when one is exploring about the country in summer.

confederates, spoke now.
He made no answer; merely looked, and bowed in submission; and soon

soon overtake her. There she is--no, that’s somebody else. That’s one
pleasure. Such another scheme, composed of so many ill-assorted people,
“Nay, how could I help saying what I did?--Nobody could have helped it.
I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculous over
trusting that you will some time or other do me greater justice than you
expressed--almost beyond what she could conceal. Never had she felt so

confiding esteem, she could not, in her general conduct, be open to any
ashamed of the appearance of the penitence, so justly and truly hers.
the bed, and I am sure you are ill enough.”
friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax, she hoped, might lead the way to a
headache she has. When one is in great pain, you know one cannot feel
came in, and said it was you. ‘Oh!’ said I, ‘it is Miss Woodhouse: I am
from Miss Bates to be now actually determined on, might be as much for
Mrs. Suckling’s own family, and Mrs. Bragge’s; but Mrs. Smallridge is
mind!--but that good Mrs. Elton, whose judgment never fails her, saw
_all_ spend your evening with us,’ said she--‘I positively must have you
“Miss Fairfax, I suppose, though you were not aware of it, had been
are not such elegant sweet children anywhere. Jane will be treated with
“Very soon, very soon, indeed; that’s the worst of it. Within a
thinking--Oh! no, now I recollect, now I have it; something happened
Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how perfectly new this
Crown chaise, and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by, the boy
Campbell comes back. I shall talk about it to him; he will settle for
Emma’s pensive meditations, as she walked home, were not interrupted;
Emma was sure he had not forgiven her; he looked unlike himself. Time,
had passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured.--
them immediately afterwards--gone in a moment. He always moved with the

You know, my dear, she is going to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor
she would be buried. Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman stoops
who would have thought it!” and resolved, that his mourning should be as
Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion, with great self-command.

headaches, and a nervous fever to a degree, which made him doubt the
grieved for her more and more, and looked around eager to discover some
indisposition so plainly, and she thought only of how she might best
except them, Jane would really see nobody.”
an hour the arrowroot was returned, with a thousand thanks from Miss
she had the consolation of knowing that her intentions were good, and of
his voice, sunk it immediately, to say, unheard by her father,
“Depend upon me--but ask no more questions. You will know it all in

it has nothing to do with any of them? Good Heavens!--What can be to be

“I do not know.--One of the Otways.--Not Frank;--it is not Frank, I
will soon be better. I shall leave you together. There is no use in
“Have you indeed no idea?” said Mrs. Weston in a trembling voice.
“More than an attachment, indeed,” resumed Mrs. Weston; “an
wonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact, it is yet almost
cannot excuse.”
Fortunately, however, it did cease. I have really for some time past,
and I must say, that I think him greatly to blame. What right had he


what she was doing, of this very project of hers, which determined him
for its all turning out well, and ready to hope that it may. They must

perfect secresy?--The Campbells, the Dixons, did none of them know of
and honour, with two people in the midst of us who may have been
as to speaking ill of him, there I must have been safe.”

most lovely and accomplished young women in England for your daughter.”

instance as in the former, with being the sole and original author of
She was extremely angry with herself. If she could not have been angry
Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her
ridiculous, that she should have the very same distressing and delicate
“About Jane Fairfax. Did you ever hear any thing so strange? Oh!--you
disappointment, or peculiar concern in the discovery. Emma looked at
“Me!” cried Harriet, colouring, and astonished. “Why should you caution
waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer.
should have considered it at first too great a presumption almost,
“Not quite,” returned Emma, with forced calmness, “for all that you then

least, however, I cannot be worse off than I should have been, if the
not set yourself against it, and try to put difficulties in the way. But
admitted--she acknowledged the whole truth. Why was it so much worse
girl who believed herself loved by Mr. Knightley--but justice required
to be called from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge, and
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since
feelings.--She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet; he
it without a blush.) He seemed to be almost asking her, whether her
not it possible, that when enquiring, as you thought, into the state of
very wonderful.”
Mr. Woodhouse would be alarmed--she had better go;”--with most ready
been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying; that she
any blessed felicity, occurred to her, to institute the comparison.--She
With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of every
thought.--Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--Such an elevation on her
folly which no tongue could express, prevented her marrying the
Harriet, from being humble, were grown vain, it was her doing too.
he loved and esteemed Isabella. She had herself been first with him for
proof of its impartiality.--How shocked had he been by her behaviour to
fully secured.--Marriage, in fact, would not do for her. It would be
resolved not to be convinced, as long as she could doubt, and yet had
way home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself, to
Churchill could be reconciled to the engagement’s becoming known; as,
thought so much of Jane; so much of every body, and so little of

expiation. I never can be blameless. I have been acting contrary to all
“Yes, I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him.”
circumstances, would, I am sure, have been as constantly bewitching to
very good--I hope she will be very happy. It is fit that the fortune

an associate for her, to be received with gratitude; and the other--what
more.
be over. The picture which she had then drawn of the privations of the
Highbury. They would be married, and settled either at or near Enscombe.
a start, or a heavy sigh, or even from walking about the room for a
Hartfield--but in the afternoon it cleared; the wind changed into a
“How d’ye do’s” were quiet and constrained on each side. She asked after
way to any such subject. He must do it all himself. Yet she could
already.”
and a heavy sigh) I seem to have been doomed to blindness.”
Emma understood him; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter
farther entangled!--I could never, I confess, from your manners, assure
He listened in perfect silence. She wished him to speak, but he would
them a habit, a trick, nothing that called for seriousness on my side.
however, that I may have underrated him. My acquaintance with him has
love, for Jane Fairfax’s character vouches for her disinterestedness;
every body ill--and they are all delighted to forgive him.--He is a
I must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it unsaid the
reached the house.
have gone too far already for concealment.--Emma, I accept your
prominent feeling.
velocity of thought, had been able--and yet without losing a word--to
once and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive, because he could not
just put an end to, might be a little extraordinary!--She felt its
opening, to soothe or to counsel her.--The rest had been the work of
degree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust.--On his side, there had been
which must be felt, nay, which he did not scruple to feel, having never
CHAPTER XIV
daughter.
for such an evening, she found one or two such very serious points
again through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever
left her so very serious, so nearly sad, that Mr. Knightley, in walking
Mrs. Weston.
                                                       “A. W.”
pardon, that I may be in danger of thinking myself too sure of yours,
thing--to time, chance, circumstance, slow effects, sudden bursts,
reprehension, excepting on one point. And now I come to the principal,
that she was perfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me,
towards her will be admitted by you and my father as great extenuation
hope, know her thoroughly yourself.--No description can describe her.
again!--But I must not propose it yet. My uncle has been too good for me
retrospect for me. I behaved shamefully. And here I can admit, that
world to our engagement, was behaving one hour with objectionable
coldness, and I went away determined that she should make the first
have done.--She closed with this offer, resolving to break with me
extreme surprize at not having had the smallest reply to her last; and
done?--One thing only.--I must speak to my uncle. Without his sanction I
done; we are reconciled, dearer, much dearer, than ever, and no moment’s

so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she was so happy herself, that
“I would rather be talking to you,” he replied; “but as it seems a

were perfectly right.”
fathomed his secret. Natural enough!--his own mind full of intrigue,
woman any proof of affection which he knows she would rather dispense
suffering unnecessarily.--She must have had much more to contend
Eltons,” was his next observation.--“His feelings are natural.--What!
“Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me to read--not even of

on one subject.”
would be a risk of her father’s comfort, perhaps even of his life, which
and advised him to think of it more; but he was fully convinced, that no
which she was now beginning to consider Donwell Abbey, was never
melancholy!
Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure;--not
Harriet expressed herself very much as might be supposed, without
very persuadable.--Harriet was to go; she was invited for at least a
be averting the past, and carrying her out of herself.
to go--and she was longing to see her; the resemblance of their present
by Jane herself, coming eagerly forward, as if no other reception of her

the purple and gold reticule by her side, saying, with significant nods,
your heart at ease as to Mrs. S.--_My_ representation, you see, has
credit?--(here was a side-glance of great meaning at Jane.) Upon my
same party, not _one_ exception.”
little show of resentment towards Jane, from the vicarage quarter,
other.--The magistrates, and overseers, and churchwardens, are always
consultation.--Mr. E. is Knightley’s right hand.”
believe,” she continued, “this is the most troublesome parish that ever
perfection.--Not that I presume to insinuate, however, that _some_
not stir till my lord and master appeared.--Here have I been sitting

ought to do,) “I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you, of
speech of him. I have nothing to do with William’s wants, but it really
not been surrounded by other friends, I might have been tempted to
myself. I feel it so very due. But, unfortunately--in short, if your
have pleasant accounts from Windsor?”
“You are very right; it has been thought of. And I will own to you, (I
Mrs. Weston’s friends were all made happy by her safety; and if the
continued--“like La Baronne d’Almane on La Comtesse d’Ostalis, in Madame

“I am sure you were of use to me,” cried Emma. “I was very often

I do not say when, but perhaps you may guess where;--in the building in
obliged to practise concealment towards him, was very little inferior to
“John does not even mention your friend,” said Mr. Knightley. “Here is
letter. “I honour his sincerity. It is very plain that he considers the
“Oh!” she cried with more thorough gaiety, “if you fancy your brother
“If I understand your brother, he only means so far as your having
recovered to admit Mr. Woodhouse’s visits, Emma having it in view that
constant addition of that person’s company whom she knew he loved, next
he not love Mr. Knightley very much?--He would not deny that he did,
approbation; and Mrs. Weston was ready, on the first meeting, to
to think he deserved even her dearest Emma; and it was in every respect
themselves; the young people will find a way.” But here there was
but the wonder of it was very soon nothing; and by the end of an hour he

love--not in the least.--Poor Knightley!--There would be an end of all

to smile.”

She was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement.

not resist. They called for him in their way; were all extremely amused;
Knightley and little John, and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry;
in better hands. His rank in society I would alter if I could, which is
“You ought to know your friend best,” replied Mr. Knightley; “but I
was the recollection of all that had so recently passed on Harriet’s
“I am quite sure,” he replied, speaking very distinctly, “that he

She checked herself, however, and submitted quietly to a little more
imagined. The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect of
High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities, was the
for coming, which he asked for, when a glimpse was caught through the
would yield its proportion of pleasure. When Mr. Weston joined the

“I never had the smallest, I assure you.”
once met since the day of reconciliation. Do not you pity me?”



gratefully burst out,
it. “She should always send for Perry, if the child appeared in the
laugh, it was evident from Jane’s countenance that she too was really
“How you can bear such recollections, is astonishing to me!--They

the words, and leave her without a care for the past, and with the
have always wished for concealment.--Such was the blood of gentility
and who had better sense than herself; retired enough for safety,
her hand bestowed on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction, as
the plan.--John and Isabella, and every other friend, were agreed in

cheerful consent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for at the

was large, and their residence was at Norland Park, in the centre of
comfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of the

own way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as to outweigh
His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known, and to him Mr.
have been made still more respectable than he was:--he might even have
not repent.

affectionate, and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to govern
their sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection that
CHAPTER 2
no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greater
to ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by giving away all his
hardly suppose I should neglect them.  But as he required the promise,
instance, it would be a very convenient addition."
expect more."
thousand pounds."
"Fifteen years! my dear Fanny; her life cannot be worth half that
unkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money would have been
thing yearly.  It may be very inconvenient some years to spare a
be reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking out for a
year! I am sure I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and as
linen was saved, and is now left to your mother.  Her house will
This argument was irresistible.  It gave to his intentions whatever of
exertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholy
affluence.  For their brothers sake, too, for the sake of his own

should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of
see him connected with some of the great men of the day.  Mrs. John
between him and his sister.  It was a contrast which recommended him
Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him.  Her manners
happy."
that fire, which at once announce virtue and intelligence.  And besides
dreadful indifference!"
life to despair of such a happiness.  Why should you be less fortunate
deficient in natural taste, though he has not had opportunities of
deficient in general taste.  Indeed, I think I may say that you cannot,
"I am sure," replied Elinor, with a smile, "that his dearest friends
have seen a great deal of him, have studied his sentiments and heard

"Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinor! Oh!  worse than
points to be considered besides his inclination.  He is very far from
so indispensably necessary to your future felicity.  Oh! if he should
attending to her views for his aggrandizement.  With such a knowledge
Mrs. Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor to
her, after giving the particulars of the house and garden, to come with
the misery of continuing her daughter-in-laws guest; and to remove for
to her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland
satisfaction in replying that she was going into Devonshire.--Edward
made her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than was
Mrs. John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she could not
own wishes, she would have kept it; but the discretion of Elinor
time when her son-in-laws promise to his father might with particular
abode as to enable Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters to begin their


impression in its favour which was of material service in recommending
additions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve was a
shall see how much I am before-hand with the world in the spring, and
house and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient.  Sir
from the post for them, and would not be denied the satisfaction of
share of his frankness and warmth; and her visit was long enough to
it took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were most like his
passed near it in their way along the valley, but it was screened from
only half the time.  Continual engagements at home and abroad, however,


imagine.  The young ladies, as well as their mother, were perfectly
Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed no more adapted by
who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind of
called him to order, wondered how any ones attention could be diverted

pronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with Marianne
perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it was at first
long outlived every sensation of the kind.  It is too ridiculous!  When

herself to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of the

can detain him at Norland?"
"How strange this is! what can be the meaning of it!  But the whole of

wish of society for her children; and she was resolute in declining to
alternative when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superior

brought her suddenly to the ground; and Margaret, unable to stop

was obliged.  His name, he replied, was Willoughby, and his present
for the hero of a favourite story; and in his carrying her into the
news however; I will ride over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner on

On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence; and he
them be ever so rich.  I am glad to find, however, from what you say,
leave him no sense of fatigue."

her own gratitude prompted; and every thing that passed during the
which could hardily be seen without delight.  From Willoughby their
opinions, she proceeded to question him on the subject of books; her
importance.  You know what he thinks of Cowper and Scott; you are
reproach would have been spared."
imagination, lively spirits, and open, affectionate manners.  He was
circumstances.  In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other
Her mother too, in whose mind not one speculative thought of their
Willoughby, an equally striking opposition of character was no

woman as Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings, that could command the
inquiries with readiness of good-breeding and good nature."
"I do not dislike him.  I consider him, on the contrary, as a very

CHAPTER 11
Dashwoods, to afford him opportunity of witnessing the excellencies of
When he was present she had no eyes for any one else.  Every thing he
This was the season of happiness to Marianne.  Her heart was devoted to
her means of improvement, she might have known very early in their
that they were sometimes only reminded of her being amongst them by her
that the misery of disappointed love had already been known to him.
common sense and observation; and then they may be more easy to define

speak from experience.  I once knew a lady who in temper and mind

told her sister of it in raptures.

her mother, by representing the inconveniences which that indulgent
shall keep it only till you can claim it.  When you leave Barton to
evening with them, and Margaret, by being left some time in the parlour
married very soon, for he has got a lock of her hair."
was in perfect unison with what she had heard and seen herself.
to the cause, by turning very red and saying in an angry manner to
"I must not tell, maam. But I know very well what it is; and I know
Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for observing, at this
be seen, as the proprietor, who was then abroad, had left strict orders

greatest inconveniences and hardships rather than be otherwise.

"My dear madam," said Lady Middleton, "recollect what you are saying."
requires my immediate attendance in town."

Elinor then heard Willoughby say, in a low voice to Marianne, "There
Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the cause of


"Come Colonel," said Mrs. Jennings, "before you go, do let us know what

on so unfortunate an event; concluding however by observing, that as
Careys came to dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearly
Marianne.  It is a very large one, I know; and when I come to see you,

have any other companion.  I never spent a pleasanter morning in my
"If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. Jennings are to be the proof of
you.--There is one remarkably pretty sitting room up stairs; of a nice

"I could see it in his face.  Poor man!  I am afraid his circumstances


tenderness which a lovers heart could give, and to the rest of the

the spring, I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of it
such a roof, I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at
"How often did I wish," added he, "when I was at Allenham this time
hitherto contained within itself more real accommodation and comfort
whole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness.
being of the party, under some trifling pretext of employment; and her
coming in, and his countenance shewed that he strongly partook of the
dispatches, and taken my farewell of Allenham; and by way of
neighbourhood to which you will be welcome?  For shame, Willoughby, can

sudden departure occasioned.
affliction was indubitable; and she thought with the tenderest
happened.  He did not speak, he did not behave like himself.  YOU must
persuaded that Mrs. Smith suspects his regard for Marianne, disapproves
"Then you would have told me, that it might or might not have happened.
the inevitable consequence of such an alteration as we just witnessed
highly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at
"I have not wanted syllables where actions have spoken so plainly.  Has
on the subject, and with me it almost outweighs every other."
fainter than they were, and they may soon be entirely done away.  If we
not encourage it.  I was startled, I confess, by the alteration in his

They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time, when she entered the

attempt at consolation from either.  Her sensibility was potent enough!
present was certain of giving.  She read nothing but what they had been
agreed that secrecy may be necessary, and we must acknowledge that it

delicacy.
pleasure, as it produced a reply from Marianne so expressive of
more open, a long stretch of the road which they had travelled on first
The person is not tall enough for him, and has not his air."
forgiven for not being Willoughby; the only one who could have gained a
rapturous nor gay, said little but what was forced from him by
some friends near Plymouth.
the air altogether inspired!  Now there is no one to regard them.  They

situated."
avoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure, and treated him
with either of her daughters, without extending the passion to her; and
inclination for a public life!"
else it must be in my own way.  Greatness will not make me so."
external comfort must be wanting.  Your ideas are only more noble than


general commission for every new print of merit to be sent you--and as

at all altered."
"I believe you are right," he replied, "and yet I have always set her

offend, but I am so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent, when I
Edward started--"Reserved! Am I reserved, Marianne?"

He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room the next morning
than the cottage, afforded a general view of the whole, which had
answers my idea of a fine country, because it unites beauty with

of nettles or thistles, or heath blossoms.  I have more pleasure in a
have thought her hair had been darker."
something else, she internally resolved henceforward to catch every
against the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness of their

was sitting.
"Well then; I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts."

lie to his actions.  He had no pleasure at Norland; he detested being
and of consistency, were most usually attributed to his want of
"I think, Edward," said Mrs. Dashwood, as they were at breakfast the
church, as I still do.  But that was not smart enough for my family.

patience--or give it a more fascinating name, call it hope.  Your
going away, she did not adopt the method so judiciously employed by
The business of self-command she settled very easily;--with strong
conversation was forbidden among them, and every effect of solitude was
knocking at the door, and stepping across the turf, obliged her to open

I said to Sir John, I do think I hear a carriage; perhaps it is Colonel
smiled all the time of her visit, except when she laughed, and smiled
I always thought it such a sweet place, maam! (turning to Mrs.
Mrs. Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as she could, and
morning, but she would come with us; she longed so much to see you all!"
He immediately went into the passage, opened the front door, and

should be sent for them and they must come.  Lady Middleton too, though

sudden thing our coming at all, and I knew nothing of it till the

The rest of the company soon dropt in.
they say it is a sweet pretty place."

"Ay, you may abuse me as you please," said the good-natured old lady,
Elinor was not inclined, after a little observation, to give him credit
got such a favour to ask of you and your sister.  Will you come and
things.  The Westons will be with us, and it will be quite delightful.


inquiring if they saw much of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland, and whether

expect Colonel Brandon to do."
delightful, I declare!  When is it to take place?"
"Is Mr. Willoughby much known in your part of Somersetshire?" said
but any testimony in his favour, however small, was pleasing to her.
match good enough for me, otherwise Sir John would have mentioned it to

invitation, and Lady Middleton was thrown into no little alarm on the
The young ladies arrived: their appearance was by no means ungenteel or
guests.  Benevolent, philanthropic man!  It was painful to him even to
But Sir John could not prevail.  He could only obtain a promise of
constant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeable
encroachments and mischievous tricks to which her cousins submitted.
a little girl of three years old, who had not made a noise for the last
cease crying.  She still screamed and sobbed lustily, kicked her two

Here too, Miss Dashwoods commendation, being only simple and just,
quiet."
"We have heard Sir John admire it excessively," said Lucy, who seemed
sure theres a vast many smart beaux in Exeter; but you know, how could
not the smallest alteration in him."

friends.
proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward, than he had been
with the curiosity which he delighted to raise, for he had at least as
uncle?  Where did he live?  How came they acquainted?"  She wished very

as a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently found her agreeable;

curiosity-- "I know nothing of her."
should not have the smallest fear of trusting YOU; indeed, I should be
very intimately connected."
unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and though
family, and looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite as
Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to believe it.
"He was four years with my uncle, who lives at Longstaple, near
that really--I beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake
to you; and, as he was always particularly afraid of his sisters
She put it into her hands as she spoke; and when Elinor saw the
keeping this secret, because you must know of what importance it is to

mind from it altogether.  I only wonder that I am alive after what I
dont think I could be equal to it.  What would you advise me to do in

"I begged him to exert himself for fear you should suspect what was the
moments, she was almost overcome--her heart sunk within her, and she
before.  She was mortified, shocked, confounded.

his uncertain behaviour towards herself, the intimate knowledge of the
of the heart was this persuasion!  How much could it not tempt her to
years--years, which if rationally spent, give such improvement to the
As these considerations occurred to her in painful succession, she wept

her appearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as with regrets so
praise, not merely from Lucys assertion, but from her venturing to
unwounded.  And as she could now have nothing more painful to hear on
or consequences, or any other game that was sufficiently noisy.
seclude herself from any chance of amusement, to go likewise.
"I am glad," said Lady Middleton to Lucy, "you are not going to finish
disappointed, I know, if the basket was not finished tomorrow, for
Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that SHE had never made

practise, gained her own end, and pleased Lady Middleton at the same
In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began.
"And yet I do assure you," replied Lucy, her little sharp eyes full of
need of all your mutual affection to support you under them.  Mr.
reciprocal attachment had failed, as between many people, and under
Lucy went on.  "I am rather of a jealous temper too by nature, and from
you none but that of waiting for Mrs. Ferrarss death, which is a
Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.
laughing heartily; "for he is one of the modestest, prettiest behaved
head, for bringing matters to bear; indeed I am bound to let you into
her husband."

opinion on the subject had I formed one.  It raises my influence much

have been wanting us to visit them these several years!  But I only go

nearly two months at the park, and to assist in the due celebration of
turn her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly, and very
go very well in my chaise; and when we are in town, if you do not like

to be able to accept it.  But my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,--I
latter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which she had
their declining the offer upon HER account; insisted on their both
you I can have no doubt.  And in all probability you will see your

Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference towards
anticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
her tongue.
it was now a matter of unconcern whether she went to town or not, and
Their departure took place in the first week in January.  The
only a few days before! But these objections had all, with that happy
zealous attention, as to ascertain what he was and what he meant,
took immediate possession of the post of civility which she had
landscape in coloured silks of her performance, in proof of her having
pleasure, and she continued her letter with greater alacrity.
engaged in her own room, could see little of what was passing.  The tea
left the room.  Elinor was disappointed too; but at the same time her
He heard her with the most earnest attention, but seeming to recollect
This, and the manner in which it was said, immediately brought back to

young and handsome.  Well! I was young once, but I never was very

now, but it was something so droll!"
that interested and occupied the others.  Restless and dissatisfied
the footman who then entered with the parcels.  She was answered in the
so doubtful, so mysterious a manner!  I long to inquire; and how will
to her than to Elinor, for it was spent in all the anxiety of
pleasure.  Poor souls!  I always pity them when they do; they seem to
perhaps it may freeze tonight!"
not be very uncomfortable herself.  And Marianne was in spirits; happy

enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which, whether at home or

returned was enough to inform her, that Willoughby had paid no second

press for greater openness in Marianne.
materially altered by a change of abode, for although scarcely settled
were, and merely nodded to Mrs. Jennings from the other side of the
"I do not know." And thus ended their discourse.
looked exceedingly hurt.  Impatient in this situation to be doing
by every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an account
particular about her.  After a pause of several minutes, their silence

resolved on, that any attempt, that in short concealment, if
she had never been informed by themselves of the terms on which they

lost in her own thoughts, and insensible of her sisters presence; and
distance from the table.

presence of mind by such an address, and was unable to say a word.  But

her chair, and Elinor, expecting every moment to see her faint, tried
with the appearance of composure, till she might speak to him with more
silent agony, too much oppressed even for tears; but as Mrs. Jennings
her from believing him so unprincipled as to have been sporting with

"Marianne, may I ask-?"
irritability, not to speak to her for the world.  In such
round the common working table, when a letter was delivered to
life!  MY girls were nothing to her, and yet they used to be foolish
"For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwood! how can you talk so?  Dont we
and eager at all events to know what Willoughby had written, hurried

     myself it will not be broken by any mistake or

with his desire of a release any professions of regret, acknowledged no
depravity of that mind which could dictate it, and probably, on the
from the bed, and whom she reached just in time to prevent her from
This, as every thing else would have been, was too much for Marianne,
suffer."
"I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state."
"No engagement!"

     I shall expect you to-morrow. For the present, adieu.
     because we are generally out by one.  We were last
     of it.  I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure
     of you; but if I am to do it, if I am to learn that
to believe.  But her condemnation of him did not blind her to the
he did.  Whatever may have changed him now, (and nothing but the
"Dearest Marianne, who but himself?  By whom can he have been
reasonable and laudable pride which resists such malevolence."
thoughtfully from the fire to the window, from the window to the fire,


she moved from one posture to another, till growing more and more

had this many a day.  But there is one comfort, my dear Miss Marianne;
said no more; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could,
that Marianne was unhappy, and felt that every thing was due to her
grieves me to see her!  And I declare if she is not gone away without
wonder! dashing about with his curricle and hunters!  Well, it dont
Miss Walker hinted to her, that she believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison would
"Dear maam, this kindness is quite unnecessary.  Marianne, I dare say,
shall see them tomorrow."
certainly will.  For my part, I think the less that is said about such
she hoped it was not required of her for Willoughbys; since, though
with the best fruit-trees in the country; and such a mulberry tree in
"Ay, if we can do THAT, Maam," said Elinor, "we shall do very well

leave, I will drink the wine myself."
"The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see.  He knows nothing of it;

attention; and what followed was a positive assertion that every thing
"It may be so; but Willoughby is capable--at least I think"--he stopped
justify him if she could."

when it came to the point, in avoiding, where it was possible, the
excellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid.  She expected
a letter from Willoughby, full of tenderness and contrition,
referring her to the letter of comfort.  But the letter, when she was
obtained her sisters consent to wait for that knowledge.
In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour, when
nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion on
giving comfort;--no, I must not say comfort--not present comfort--but

some measure, your sister Marianne."
believe, fervent as the attachment of your sister to Mr. Willoughby and
till my fathers point was gained.  I had depended on her fortitude too
happiness of both by removing from her for years, and for that purpose
for her; but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy.  I could
me, to be the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl, on whom
I have fancied between her and my poor disgraced relation.  Their
brother, (which happened about five years ago, and which left to me the
give no clue, though she certainly knew all.  He, her father, a
to Whitwell; and this was the reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly,

considers the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl, and




become settled, but it was settled in a gloomy dejection.  She felt the
arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought; to express her
least five or six weeks.  A variety of occupations, of objects, and of

But it was a matter of great consolation to her, that what brought evil
Sir John, could not have thought it possible.  "A man of whom he had
for it was a great deal too far off to visit; she hated him so much
her without feeling any curiosity after particulars, or any anxiety for
wrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to the
exertion had produced an increase of good-will towards himself, and
was married.  She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to
About this time the two Miss Steeles, lately arrived at their cousins
have been such a great pity to have went away before your brother and
"Oh, oh!" cried Mrs. Jennings; "very pretty, indeed! and the Doctor is
you will contradict it, if you ever hear it talked of."
"What a charming thing it is that Mrs. Dashwood can spare you both for


she had no business at Grays, it was resolved, that while her young
finally arranged by his own inventive fancy, he had no leisure to
At last the affair was decided.  The ivory, the gold, and the pearls,
from being sorry to see his sisters again; it rather gave them
too, you must introduce me to THEM.  As my mother-in-laws relations, I
to hear it, I assure you."
upon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or something like it, and she
"Yes; he has very good property in Dorsetshire."
were TWICE as much, for your sake."
and no civility shall be wanting on my part to make him pleased with

pounds.  And extremely acceptable it is, for we must live at a great
my duty to buy it.  I could not have answered it to my conscience to
Norland.  Our respected father, as you well know, bequeathed all the
flower-garden marked out."
next visit at Grays his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he began
people of common prudence will do THAT; and whatever she saves, she
anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries you too far."
sooner and better than you did; not but what she is exceedingly fond of
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
Jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woman, though not so elegant
that she waited the very next day both on Mrs. Jennings and her
affection, and almost without having anything to say to them; for of
of detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet, was not to be
always glad to be where the Miss Dashwoods were, received his eager
So well had they recommended themselves to Lady Middleton, so agreeable
than she was on receiving Mrs. John Dashwoods card.
when they were together.
her, and with great sincerity, that she did pity her--to the utter
Elinor could not NOW be made unhappy by this behaviour.-- A few months
Lucy was all exultation on being so honorably distinguished; and Miss
agreeable--Want of sense, either natural or improved--want of
again as often as they liked.

taste, will, I dare say, be pleased with them.  I do not know whether
all, returned them to her daughter.
Marianne could not bear this.--She was already greatly displeased with


the impression of what had passed, the whole evening.

She wondered that Lucys spirits could be so very much elevated by the
come to talk to you of my happiness.  Could anything be so flattering
Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still pressed her to
Dashwood was!"
But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for she directly replied,

have as great an inclination to walk out of the room again, as to
consciousness of some injustice towards herself, to deter her from
and almost every thing that WAS said, proceeded from Elinor, who was
affection of a sister.
her eyes were filled with tears as she spoke, "dont think of MY

And with this admirable discretion did she defer the assurance of her
Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed entirely insensible of the
to be particularly ill-suited to the feelings of two thirds of her
to him of any.  It is but natural that he should like to see her as
would not often expose her or himself to the distress of hearing
This event, highly important to Mrs. Jenningss happiness, produced a
THEIR ground, and sharing the kindness which they wanted to monopolize.
it entirely.  Would either of them only have given her a full and
All these jealousies and discontents, however, were so totally
every other baby of the same age; nor could he even be brought to
immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street; and this
going out every day, that it was become a matter of indifference to
and how much she had every year to spend upon herself.  The

speaking familiarly to her brother; and had just determined to find out
conversation; for, talking of his brother, and lamenting the extreme
instead of sending him to Mr. Pratts, all this would have been

Elliotts, near Dartford.  Lady Elliott wished to give a dance.  But
compliment of rational opposition.
Middleton, for they spend every day with her; otherwise I should be
I think the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so very well
her sisters, for some days, in Harley Street, as soon as Lady
on so short an acquaintance, seemed to declare that the good-will
whether she should ever be able to part with them.
it no longer necessary to give up the whole of her time to her; and,

unpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as to
thing possible?-- There is no great wonder in their liking one another;
reached your brothers ears, as he was sitting in his own dressing-room
off; poor Lucy in such a condition, he says, she could hardly walk; and
son, and though Lucy has next to nothing herself, she knows better than
above all the rest, in the absence of Marianne, she felt very well able
necessity of preparing Marianne for its discussion.  No time was to be
represent herself as suffering much, any otherwise than as the
Lucy Steele, she considered her so totally unamiable, so absolutely



single and constant attachment, and all that can be said of ones
would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained to
unhappiness.-- If you can think me capable of ever feeling--surely you
suffering for me!--Is this my gratitude?--Is this the only return I can
attended to all that Mrs. Jennings had to say upon the subject, with an

thought they deserved some attention, were harmless, well-behaved
be sure, said she, I might have thought myself safe. She was quite
would she be from affording him the smallest assistance, that if he
very little; but what he did say, was in the most determined manner.

for the feelings of Edward, while braving his mothers threats, for a
it?--and when to that is added the recollection, that he might, but for
"If he would only have done as well by himself," said John Dashwood,

Mrs. Jennings, they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the
discovery, restored to its proper state, it was not a subject on which
dispirited her more.
again in town, and had a constant dread of meeting them, chose rather
"Get it all out of her, my dear.  She will tell you any thing if you

She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor had nothing to say,
one; for Miss Godby told Miss Sparks, that nobody in their senses could
have.  And how he had been so worried by what passed, that as soon as
his own.  I will take my oath he never dropt a syllable of being tired
not care to leave Edward; so I just run up stairs and put on a pair of
particulars of a conversation which you ought not to have known
shant say anything against them to YOU; and to be sure they did send
"Well," said Elinor, "it is a comfort to be prepared against the worst.
wont ask us any more this bout.  Good-by; I am sorry Miss Marianne was
As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs. Jennings was eager for
help em! how poor they will be!--I must see what I can give them
     therefore will make no more apologies, but proceed
     he consent to it; but he said it should never be,
     cousins would be proud to know her.--My paper reminds
soul! I wish I COULD get him a living, with all my heart.--She calls me
for the air, the liberty, the quiet of the country; and fancied that if
Mr. Palmer himself, as, joined to the very great amendment of his
go there."


interval of Mariannes turning from one lesson to another, some words
ready to cry out, "Lord! what should hinder it?"--but checking her
of them, as he immediately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and go away
feeling,--"of dividing, or attempting to divide, two young people long
comfortable income.  Such as it is, however, my pleasure in presenting
them to deserve; and promised to undertake the commission with
evil which Elinor, as Mrs. Jennings had supposed her to do, made very
my patronage ends with this; and my interest is hardly more extensive.

not many men who would act as he has done.  Few people who have so
shall soon know where to look for them."
carriage being at the door; and Mrs. Jennings immediately preparing to
would not have me tell it to Lucy, for I think of going as far as
much the better for him.  Ay, to be sure, he must be ordained in
any thing to please me so well since Charlotte was brought to bed."
them made a difficulty of that which to any other person would have
upon this greatest exertion of all.  Her astonishment and confusion
extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister;
it were more valuable.  Allow me to congratulate you on having so
worst was over, "Colonel Brandon means it as a testimony of his concern
I am no orator."
entered it.  For a short time he sat deep in thought, after Elinor had
a look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that he
happiness in every change of situation that might befall him; on HIS,
it again as soon as Elinor appeared.


goes to it."

that credit which Edward WOULD give her, that she spoke of her
it necessary to pay her a visit.--This was an obligation, however,
house, her husband accidentally came out.  He expressed great pleasure
"I am not sorry to see you alone," he replied, "for I have a good deal
value--supposing the late incumbent to have been old and sickly, and
it was given, obliged him to submit to her authority.
impoverished.
be interested in any thing that befalls him.-- She would not be so weak
affectionate mothers in the world."
the same to Miss Morton whether she marry Edward or Robert."
very best authority--not that I ever precisely heard Mrs. Ferrars say
Colonel Brandon been with you lately?"

look, however, very well bestowed, for it relieved her own feelings,
and I declare and protest to you I never was so shocked in my life, as
"Yes; once, while she was staying in this house, I happened to drop in
thinking, in short, that means might have been found.  But now it is


she had long been to quit it, could not, when it came to the point, bid


wandering from place to place in free and luxurious solitude, she

joined in their discourse; and Marianne, who had the knack of finding
reduced very low.
devoted to business.  She liked him, however, upon the whole, much
readiness to converse with her, and his deference for her opinion,
over the grounds, and especially in the most distant parts of them,
CHAPTER 43
A very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed the
idle, found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too great to be
Poor Marianne, languid and low from the nature of her malady, and
and good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away
Dashwood in any emergence.
forebodings, was not in a state of mind to resist their influence.  He
to travel.
Marianne.
"But she must not go round by London," cried Marianne, in the same
immediately before him.  Her fears, he had no courage, no confidence to
would lessen it.
security; and the servant who sat up with her, for she would not allow
for his delay, for though acknowledging a very unexpected and
a less interested person with concern.  On Mrs. Jenningss compassion
confident as the last, and his visit concluded with encouraging
sisters pulse;--she waited, watched, and examined it again and
his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even surpassing his
no smiles.  All within Elinors breast was satisfaction, silent and
mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she must
into the sick chamber, to satisfy herself that all continued right,
satisfied of the truth.  She instantly saw that her ears had not
assured her that they were already in the house.  She rushed to the
stay."
She hesitated; she knew not what to do.  The possibility of Colonel
"Your sister," said he, with abruptness, a moment afterwards--"is out
signify?--For once, Miss Dashwood--it will be the last time,
perfectly calm; "yes, I am very drunk.-- A pint of porter with my cold
"Mr. Willoughby, you OUGHT to feel, and I certainly DO--that after what
the former Willoughby to her remembrance, and in spite of herself made
imputed to me.-- Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,--it is
Miss Dashwood, at this point, turning her eyes on him with the most
woman of fortune.  To attach myself to your sister, therefore, was not
"You did then," said Elinor, a little softened, "believe yourself at
great circumspection for a possible opportunity of making myself

which, for a very short time, had the power of creating any return.  I
"But, upon my soul, I did NOT know it," he warmly replied; "I did not
she offered to forgive the past, if I would marry Eliza.  That could
point of long debate.  To see Marianne, I felt, would be dreadful, and
You were all gone I do not know where.  I had left her only the evening

journey!"
emotion--my feelings were very, very painful.--Every line, every word
"Mariannes note, by assuring me that I was still as dear to her as in
was impossible.  All that I had to do, was to avoid you both.  I sent
out of your sight, could have separated us so long.  I avoided the
than all.  Well, at last, as I need not tell you, you were forced on

know, the very next morning.  You saw what she said.  I was

society, they already think me an unprincipled fellow, this letter will
wife has a claim to your politeness, to your respect, at least.  She
yourself, on the whole, less faulty than I had believed you.  You have
called, your justification.  But you have not explained to me the
undiscerning Sir John.  His heart was softened in seeing mine suffer;
and talents, united a disposition naturally open and honest, and a
said--

"Well,"--he replied--"once more good bye. I shall now go away and live

degree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them, which made
expected arrival, threw her altogether into an agitation of spirits
overcome by her happiness, as she had been before by her fears.  She
the life of a child was at stake, and Marianne, satisfied in knowing
Then, remembering Colonel Brandon, reproved herself, felt that to HIS
declared herself, one of the happiest women in the world.  Elinor could
Her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained, surprised and
"He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled.  It came
ever felt or feigned, as much more warm, as more sincere or
"His character, however," answered Elinor, "does not rest on ONE act of
lived, as I trusted she might, my greatest happiness would lie in
to be an advantage, as to make his character and principles fixed;--and
more accordant with her real disposition, than the liveliness--often
Poor Elinor!--here was a new scheme for getting her to Delaford!--but

past scenes of misery to his mind, brought back by that resemblance
measures depended those of her two friends; Mrs. Jennings could not
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and bidding
observation of the latter was particularly grateful.  She, who had seen
and in its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise.  In the whole of her
however with firmness as she did so, that she should in future practice
foundations as far as we are told they once reached.  I know we shall
in introducing excess into a scheme of such rational employment and

ought to do."--

in silence.
illness has made me think-- It has given me leisure and calmness for
friend, my sister!--You, who had seen all the fretful selfishness of my
me; but to what avail?--Was I more considerate of you and your comfort?
"You are very good.--The future must be my proof.  I have laid down my
She paused--and added in a low voice, "If I could but know HIS heart,
thousand inquiries sprung up from her heart, but she dared not urge
result, and a resolution of reviving the subject again, should Marianne
means, nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Eliza.  Nothing

"It is a great relief to me--what Elinor told me this morning--I have
Marianne sighed, and repeated, "I wish for no change."
to attempt all the economy that would appear to you possible: and,
the end of the affair, has been grounded on selfishness.  It was
have suffered under the pecuniary distresses which, because they are
felt their own error, wished to avoid any survey of the past that might
Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the two or three following
in the first of Johns, there had been this sentence:-- "We know
turning pale, and fell back in her chair in hysterics.  Mrs. Dashwood,
benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it.
howsever, when they come back, theyd make sure to come and see you."

to expect them.  She recognised the whole of Lucy in the message, and
"Yes, maam, she said how she was very well; and to my mind she was
hazard any remark, and ventured not to offer consolation.  She now


the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of half her

"He comes from Mr. Pratts purposely to see us.  I WILL be calm; I WILL

Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight, to conceal her

"Mrs. Robert Ferrars!"--was repeated by Marianne and her mother in an
"Yes," said he, "they were married last week, and are now at Dawlish."

feel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really did, so much in
once to that security with another, which he must have thought of
have happened; for though I left Longstaple with what I thought, at the
was always sure of a welcome; and accordingly I spent the greatest part
together, and yet enjoy, as she wished, the sight and society of both.
overcome by her own felicity;--and happily disposed as is the human
Lucys marriage, the unceasing and reasonable wonder among them all,
on by the flattery of the other, as to lead by degrees to all the rest.
were neither less frequent, nor less affectionate than usual.  Not the
     and it shall not be my fault if we are not always
     "I have burnt all your letters, and will return
"However it may have come about," said Elinor, after a pause,--"they
by him.  He had quitted Oxford within four and twenty hours after
malice against him in her message by Thomas, was perfectly clear to
her the option of continuing the engagement or not, when I was
fettered neither her inclination nor her actions.  The connection was
fancy and expect WHAT, as you were THEN situated, could never be."

attention, as to be entirely mistress of the subject.
income.  But Elinor had no such dependence; for since Edward would
A three weeks residence at Delaford, where, in his evening hours at
for it could not be otherwise.  Their resemblance in good principles
before Lucy called and sat a couple of hours with me.  Not a soul
unfortunate of women--poor Fanny had suffered agonies of
"Mrs. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edwards name, which does not
my mothers pardon for Roberts ingratitude to HER, and breach of

were needed to it; and from thence, after staying there a couple of
a few weeks ago, had robbed her of one; the similar annihilation of
the daughter of a private gentleman with no more than THREE; but when
been given with Fanny.
church early in the autumn.
almost ashamed of having authorised; and even the Dashwoods were at the
happen--for, when people are much thrown together, and see little of

they parted, which could only be removed by another half hours
comprehended only Robert; and Lucy, who had owed his mother no duty and
in which their husbands of course took a part, as well as the frequent
exchange.


whole heart became, in time, as much devoted to her husband, as it had
nor his home always uncomfortable; and in his breed of horses and dogs,

MANSFIELD PARK
to the rank of a baronet’s lady, with all the comforts and consequences
felicity with very little less than a thousand a year. But Miss Frances
remarkably easy and indolent, would have contented herself with merely
it in her power to tell them, as she now and then did, in an angry
years old, a fine spirited fellow, who longed to be out in the world;
own it to be her wish that poor Mrs. Price should be relieved from the
interrupted him with a reply to them all, whether stated or not.
Thomas, I may say, or at least of _yours_, would not grow up in this
even to have the beauty of an angel, and she will never be more to
on this point. Whatever I can do, as you well know, I am always ready
under the care of any creditable person that may chance to be going. I
quite as well how to save her own as to spend that of her friends.

took up every moment of her time, and the very mention of such a thing
for three days. I suppose, sister, you will put the child in the little
no reason to expect so great an evil. We shall probably see much to wish
just got Julia to leave it alone.”
Mrs. Norris was quite at his service; and though she perfectly agreed

seeing how much she needed encouragement, tried to be all that was
soon able to take a full survey of her face and her frock in easy
behaviour which it ought to produce, and her consciousness of misery was
little sulkiness of temper--her poor mother had a good deal; but we must
cousin, produced little union. They could not but hold her cheap on
clothes; and when to these sorrows was added the idea of the brothers

with relations and friends, who all love you, and wish to make you

“My uncle!” repeated Fanny, with a frightened look.
incapable of expressing; but her countenance and a few artless words
formidable; and if there were some amongst them whom she could not cease
Edmund was uniformly kind himself; and she had nothing worse to endure
and as her cousins found her ignorant of many things with which they had
should cross to the Isle of Wight. She thinks of nothing but the Isle of
vast deal of difference in memories, as well as in everything else,
you are;--on the contrary, it is much more desirable that there should
needlework, of little use and no beauty, thinking more of her pug than
attachment to her former home, grew up there not unhappily among her
much uneasiness; but his other children promised him nothing but good.
William. Of the rest she saw nothing: nobody seemed to think of her ever
display of doing more than the rest, or any fear of doing too much,
she read, and heightened its attraction by judicious praise. In return

feelings as a brother on the occasion. You have robbed Edmund for ten,

decided eligibility; and as his own circumstances were rendered less
But you must come up and tack on my patterns all the same.”
“And am I never to live here again?”

You will be what you ought to be to her. I hope it does not distress you
“What is to prevent you?”
life.”
temper to do a great deal for anybody she really interests herself

not the smallest intention of taking her. It had never occurred to her,
to live with you.”
Sure Sir Thomas could not seriously expect such a thing! Sir Thomas is
husbands, my health gone in attending and nursing him, my spirits still
A great many things were due from poor Mr. Norris, as clergyman of the
sure of being well provided for. Sir Thomas will take care of that.”
Lady Bertram repeated enough of this conversation to her husband to
White House, the Grants arrived at the Parsonage, and these events over,
understand. A fine lady in a country parsonage was quite out of place.
expedient to go to Antigua himself, for the better arrangement of his
was not disturbed by any alarm for his safety, or solicitude for his
never to return! that she should see him go without a tear! it was a
hypocrite.
after a favourable voyage, was received; though not before Mrs. Norris
little occasion to be occupied in fears for the absent.
post of such honourable representation, and very thoroughly relished
listened, therefore, without an idea of any nearer concern in them. Upon
home the whole day with one aunt, or walked beyond her strength at
improper, that Fanny should have a regular lady’s horse of her own, in
more attention to what she said; and at length determined on a method of
beyond all her words to express. She regarded her cousin as an example
in which everything was then involved determined him on sending home his
of men of fortune, and particularly on the introduction of a young man
enhance its desirableness to either party; and, among other means, by

Edmund was the only one of the family who could see a fault in the
of settling everything to his entire satisfaction, and leaving Antigua
farther adverse in their feelings than that each had their favourite, to
highly agreeable; and her chief anxiety was lest Mansfield should not
The meeting was very satisfactory on each side. Miss Crawford found a
house before she told her what she had planned.


says on the subject of marriage. If they profess a disinclination for
The young people were pleased with each other from the first. On each
teeth were so good, and he was so well made, that one soon forgot he was
to die of love; but with sense and temper which ought to have made him
“So I should suppose. She has the advantage in every feature, and I
are over, and she feels that she may exert all her powers of pleasing
“We must leave him to himself, I believe. Talking does no good. He will
consider that it is, of all transactions, the one in which people expect
half. You see the evil, but you do not see the consolation. There will

that their manners, particularly those of the eldest, were very good.
as to deserve to be in any collection of engravings of gentlemen’s

what you mean, but I will not undertake to answer the question. My
_That_ is the faulty part of the present system. One does not like to
so. The Andersons of Baker Street. We were speaking of them the other
heard the story.”
afterwards.”
were there, all new to me. When we reached Albion Place they were out;
sister, I feel for her. To be neglected before one’s time must be very

He had been visiting a friend in the neighbouring county, and that
country: you see the house in the most surprising manner. I declare,
“I must try to do something with it,” said Mr. Rushworth, “but I do not
if I had anything within the fiftieth part of the size of Sotherton, I
only the spring twelvemonth before Mr. Norris’s death that we put in the
is an insipid fruit at the best; but a good apricot is eatable, which
After a short interruption Mr. Rushworth began again. “Smith’s place
usually a great talker, had still more to say on the subject next his

of distance for a ride. I wish we could contrive it.”

was complete.”
seats innumerable: but it must all be done without my care. Henry is
he told the miller, and the miller told the butcher, and the butcher’s
speak for one directly; and as I cannot look out of my dressing-closet
harvest, it must be quite out of their power to spare a horse.”
I dearly love music myself, and where the natural taste is equal the
when obliged to take up the pen to say that such a horse is ill, or such

of men, but they do not belong to _us_. Of various admirals I could tell
Edmund reverted to the harp, and was again very happy in the prospect of
 was his answer; “but I fear there would be some disappointment: you

and taking a bed there; when Mrs. Norris, as if reading in her two
I dare say Mr. Crawford would take my two nieces and me in his barouche,


impropriety is a reflection itself upon Mrs. Crawford, as her niece has
had she to suppose that _you_ would not write long letters when you were
could not follow. Miss Crawford’s attractions did not lessen. The harp
everything will turn to account when love is once set going, even the

remarks to him, lest it should appear like ill-nature. The first actual
inconvenience to Fanny. Edmund, who had taken down the mare and presided
The houses, though scarcely half a mile apart, were not within sight of
see how well she sat. After a few minutes they stopped entirely. Edmund
by seeing the party in the meadow disperse, and Miss Crawford still on
cousin to ride twice as far as she ever goes,” said he, “and you have
part of the park; her feelings of discomfort not lightened by seeing, as
early excellence in it was like their own, and they had great pleasure
“I do not want her at all for myself,” said he; “but whenever you are
young people but herself, and was much enjoyed at the time, and doubly
but it was felt as a very grievous injury, and her good manners were
their remarks on the stars, to think beyond themselves; but when the
not touched yet. I am sure I almost broke my back by cutting it out. You
“I can hardly believe you,” he replied; “I know your looks too well. How
was shady enough in the alcove, but I declare I quite dreaded the coming


can justly accuse me of sparing myself upon any occasion, but really I
of that kind; and though the sun was strong, it was not so very hot.
it easier to swallow than to speak.
struggling against discontent and envy for some days past. As she leant
execution of the plan for visiting Sotherton, which had been started a
Crawford at home. The Sotherton scheme was mentioned of course. It was
have a companion in Fanny Price, you know, so it will all do very well;

make up her mind as to whether Miss Crawford’s being of the party were




worse. When Edmund, therefore, told her in reply, as he did when she

Lady Bertram was very well pleased to have it so, and the young ladies
you were saying lately that you wished you could drive, Julia, I think
the cottages, the cattle, the children, she found entertainment that
profile as he turned with a smile to Julia, or to catch the laugh of
the vicinity of Sotherton the former had considerable effect. Mr.
terrible. There is the parsonage: a tidy-looking house, and I understand
that “it was a sort of building which she could not look at but with

Mr. Rushworth mentioned his curricle. Mr. Crawford suggested the greater
solid mahogany, rich damask, marble, gilding, and carving, each handsome

They entered. Fanny’s imagination had prepared her for something

Mrs. Rushworth was gone to repeat her lesson to Mr. Crawford; and
the master and mistress do _not_ attend themselves, there must be more
something very different--especially if the poor chaplain were not worth

“Do look at Mr. Rushworth and Maria, standing side by side, exactly as
Julia, joining them at the moment, carried on the joke.

The chapel was soon afterwards left to the silence and stillness
with the who and the how, was likely to be more fully agitated, and Mrs.
“James,” said Mrs. Rushworth to her son, “I believe the wilderness
were found in busy consultation on the terrace by Edmund, Miss Crawford,
had not formed any essential part of her education, made her miserable
larch and laurel, and beech cut down, and though laid out with too much
“A very praiseworthy practice,” said Edmund, “but not quite universal.
“The _nothing_ of conversation has its gradations, I hope, as well as
week, even supposing them worth hearing, supposing the preacher to have
his neighbourhood, where the parish and neighbourhood are of a size

of the two, but I forestall you; remember, I have forestalled you.”
 turning to Miss Crawford, “my other companion may do me the honour of
love as to measure distance, or reckon time, with feminine lawlessness.
speak within compass.”
you if you are to be knocked up. Every sort of exercise fatigues her so
allowed to be the greatest bore in the world, and Miss Price has found
“It is an immense distance,” said she; “I see _that_ with a glance.”
was not stronger. She watched them till they had turned the corner, and

After some minutes spent in this way, Miss Bertram, observing the iron
“It is undoubtedly the best thing we can do now, as we are so far from


unluckily that iron gate, that ha-ha, give me a feeling of restraint and
“Or if we are, Miss Price will be so good as to tell him that he will
astonished at Miss Bertram, and angry with Mr. Crawford. By taking

it pass: Julia was vexed, and her temper was hasty; but she felt that it
And she immediately scrambled across the fence, and walked away, not
“I do not believe I shall go any farther,” said he sullenly; “I see

“If I had made any difficulty about fetching the key, there might have
that sort, you know, can be settled without you.”
soon after their leaving her, and they had been across a portion of the
and Mrs. Norris presented themselves at the top, just ready for the
to lounge away the time as they could with sofas, and chit-chat, and
Dinner was soon followed by tea and coffee, a ten miles’ drive home
the box, and his complacency seemed confirmed by the arrangement.
my lap directly. There, Fanny, you shall carry that parcel for me; take
eggs, which Mrs. Whitaker would quite force upon me: she would not take

his passage in the September packet, and he consequently looked forward


a foreign land, offered sacrifices to the gods on their safe return.”
understand, hereabouts.”

justified in your eyes, he must do it in the most complete uncertainty
“Oh! no doubt he is very sincere in preferring an income ready made,
your own observation can have given you much knowledge of the clergy.

is out of humour with his excellent wife. To own the truth, Henry and
has now, I think more would have been made unhappy by him as a sailor or
fate, Miss Price, than to be the wife of a man whose amiableness

lift the heart to rapture! When I look out on such a night as this, I
“Yes, and the Bear. I wish I could see Cassiopeia.”
threats of catching cold.

guard, and made even Julia admit, in her jealousy of her sister, the
his jealousy of his neighbours, his doubts of their qualifications,
sister without observation, and seldom without wonder or censure; and
“What a favourite he is with my cousins!”
himself in any danger from Maria; and I am not at all afraid for her,
then depended. It was Fanny’s first ball, though without the preparation
“Yes, ma’am, indeed,” replied the other, with a stately simper, “there
together. How she had looked before, Fanny could not recollect, for she

her to dance, drew a chair near her, and gave her an account of the
a sly face as he spoke towards the chair of the latter, who proving,

without ceremony, before them all, so as to leave me no possibility
a lord with a tolerable independence; and Sir Thomas would probably
private theatricals at Ecclesford, the seat of the Right Hon. Lord
as I certainly would not accept again; but I was determined to make no
“It was a hard case, upon my word”; and, “I do think you were very much
Baron, and was not sorry to withdraw; and to make _you_ amends, Yates, I
the singing hero of a farce in his scarlet coat and cocked hat. I feel


passed at table, did not evince the least disapprobation.
my father’s room will be an excellent greenroom. It seems to join the
situation is a very delicate one, considering everything, extremely
amusing that anxiety, and keeping up her spirits for the next few weeks,
“What is the matter?” asked her ladyship, in the heavy tone of one
have we mourned over the dead body of Julius Caesar, and to _be’d_ and
“If you are resolved on acting,” replied the persevering Edmund, “I must

against.”

brothers and sisters and intimate friends, and which would never be
was obliged to acknowledge that the charm of acting might well carry
project.
into a curtain by the housemaids, and still the play was wanting; and
difference, they wanted a piece containing very few characters in the
not wish to make objections; I shall be happy to be of any use, but I
to give me, so as it be comic. Let it but be comic, I condition for
wants it; a trifling part, but the sort of thing I should not dislike,
some very good ranting-ground in Frederick, he professed an equal
enough. Amelia and Agatha may do for Maria and me, but here is nothing
seeming carelessness was turning over the first act, soon settled the
herself enough to speak, her brother gave his weight against her too,
all agreed that it could not be offered to anybody else. A little more

Crawford’s better claim.

“Miss Crawford must be Amelia. She will be an excellent Amelia.”
the play, with Mr. Yates’s help, to ascertain what scenery would be
of which she had heard so much. Her curiosity was all awake, and she ran
Miss Crawford accepted the part very readily; and soon after Miss
finery very well, though affecting to despise it; and was too much

“But what do you do for women?” said Edmund gravely, and looking at
dress and a pink satin cloak.”
acquainted with the play, I assure you; and with a very few omissions,
harangue all the rest upon a subject of this kind. _There_ would be the
“I am convinced, madam,” said Edmund, preventing Fanny, “that Sir Thomas
shall never act anything.”
steady head to superintend so many young ones. I forgot to tell Tom of
pretty sharp; and I dare say it will cure him of coming marauding about
and Mr. Rushworth, having only his own part and his own dress in his
Crawford was soon seated with the other three at the table, while his
interest herself in their arrangements till, as if struck by a sudden
brightened look; “Anhalt is a heavy part.”
“Do not you think he would?”
“_I_ should have no objection,” she replied; “for though I should not
lecturer; and the man who chuses the profession itself is, perhaps, one
“Oh! we do not want to disturb you from your seat. We do not want your
would you do with such a part as mine? I have forty-two to learn.”
“Phoo! Phoo! Do not be so shamefaced. You’ll do it very well. Every
after it, Mrs. Norris completed the whole by thus addressing her in a
what she is.”

undertake the part of Anhalt in addition to the Butler: he had been most
After a moment’s thought, Miss Crawford calmly replied, “As far as I
undervoice to Fanny, after some consideration; “and I can tell Mr.
something so infinitely worse, to be told that she must do what was
and of which she had now for some time been almost equally mistress. It
one making the use of the other so evidently reasonable that the Miss
been a collector from the first hour of her commanding a shilling--her
harmonised by distance, that every former affliction had its charm. The
an agitated, doubting spirit, to see if by looking at Edmund’s profile
that she had received from them. The table between the windows was
“My opinion!” she cried, shrinking from such a compliment, highly as it
“Yes; but what can be done? Your brother is so determined.”
“But what? I see your judgment is not with me. Think it a little over.

object is to confine it to Mrs. Rushworth and the Grants. Will not this
“If you are against me, I ought to distrust myself, and yet--But it is
the middle, but Edmund was satisfied.
gone, you will empty your head of all this nonsense of acting, and sit
but could hardly tease her. She was beyond their reach; and if at last
to it by the force of selfish inclinations only. Edmund had descended
admitted a good deal of action and emphasis, and Mr. Rushworth undertook
affair as could have but one effect on him. “He was certainly right in
happiness under it made her wretched. She was full of jealousy and
character she had accepted. But reflection brought better feelings, and
tranquillity for herself. She either sat in gloomy silence, wrapt in
most persuasive smile, that neither he nor Julia had ever had a serious
“You had better tell Miss Bertram to think of Mr. Rushworth. It may
     To Templars modesty, to Parsons sense.
order. But, Mary, do not fancy that Maria Bertram cares for Henry. I
loved, she did love still, and she had all the suffering which a warm
without trusting that it would create jealousy, and bring a public
in contriving and directing the general little matters of the company,
too much for her at first. Everybody began to have their vexation.
listener at hand, came in for the complaints and the distresses of
ought; nobody would remember on which side they were to come in; nobody
insipidity; and the day came at last, when Mr. Rushworth turned to her
first line of his speech, and being able to follow the prompter through
help was wanted; and that Mrs. Norris thought her quite as well off
“One cannot wonder, sister, that Fanny _should_ be delighted: it is
a play without a curtain--and I am much mistaken if you do not find it
rehearsed it, even in private.

be so good, won’t you?”

well as I could, by whispering to him, ‘We shall have an excellent
likely to be more than momentary in _them_. He too had his book, and was
otherwise qualified for criticism, her conscience must have restrained
of it again that very day.
They did not wait long for the Crawfords, but there was no Mrs. Grant.
would be so good as to _read_ the part.” She was immediately surrounded
sure you know the part.”

was a terrible pause; and terrible to every ear were the corroborating
words between them were sufficient. The case admitted no difference of
Fanny was left with only the Crawfords and Mr. Yates. She had been quite
were still in Antigua.
necessary; and therefore, thanking them, said, “he preferred remaining
family, were before her. As she entered, her own name caught her ear.
after her family, especially William: and his kindness altogether was
latterly been prosperously rapid, and he came directly from Liverpool,
By not one of the circle was he listened to with such unbroken,
would have been for her to bear a lengthened absence.
whether his arrival or his death were to be the thing unfolded; and was
everybody’s comfort, my dear Mrs. Norris,” was his answer. “But indeed I
“Indeed! and what have you been acting?”
pheasants, sir, I assure you, as much as you could desire. I do not

the billiard-room door struck him especially, but he had scarcely more
such an exhibition, such a piece of true acting, as he would not have
it could supply, to save Sir Thomas from anger on finding himself thus
Thomas having exerted himself so far as to speak a few words of
allow him to lead the discourse while he mingled among the others with

that was passing before her. Such a look of reproach at Edmund from his

gentleman-like, considering; but you should tell your father he is not
and feel many scruples which my children do _not_ feel, is perfectly
preserving that good opinion a little longer.
one of us, excepting Fanny. Fanny is the only one who has judged rightly
sufficient.
to Sir Thomas, and would not have admitted that her influence was
and then prevailed on my sister to pay the first visit, I am as certain
horses of course; and poor old coachman would attend us, out of his
the horses. And when we got to the bottom of Sandcroft Hill, what do you
He is not a shining character, but he has a thousand good qualities; and
his stables and his gardens, and nearest plantations; but active and
had been out with their guns the chief of the morning, and Tom had taken
unintelligibly moral, so infamously tyrannical as Sir Thomas. He was
ever coming back again. But they had seen no one from the Parsonage,
between herself and Tom, ask the latter in an undervoice whether
could immediately say with easy fluency, “I am sorry you are going;
neither pride nor resolution, was preparing to encounter her share of it
acknowledged, was a very short one. He was gone--he had touched her
the sincerity of Edmund’s too partial regard, to the unconcern of his
hall-door, were given with genuine satisfaction. Mr. Yates had staid to

their very great attention to my mother and sisters while he was away. I
much the same. There was never much laughing in his presence; or, if
I could listen to him for an hour together. It entertains _me_ more than
the short of the matter. Anybody but myself would have made something
only wish you would talk to him more. You are one of those who are too

value his powers. I wish they met more frequently! I hope she does not
Fanny could have said a great deal, but it was safer to say nothing, and
longer deceive himself. I am sorry for them all, and would give
resolved to speak seriously to her. Advantageous as would be the
through her engagement, or was sensible of any change of opinion or
would certainly be everything else in her favour. A well-disposed young
the possibility of giving Crawford the triumph of governing her actions,
he had done it; he should not destroy her credit, her appearance, her
restraint, and tranquillity; by the misery of disappointed affection,
before the middle of the same month the ceremony had taken place which
must feel, and was indeed experiencing much of the agitation which his
range of London.
and how much more their tenderhearted cousin, who wandered about

premises, was forced, though not without some modest reluctance on her
waited on by mistresses and maids, being also obliged, on returning
to establish her during the rain, her being in such cottage would be
She played accordingly; happy to have a new listener, and a listener who
something more to you--a very pretty piece--and your cousin Edmund’s

comparatively unsheltered, remaining there perhaps till, in the midst
changes of the human mind!” And following the latter train of thought,
“It may seem impertinent in _me_ to praise, but I must admire the taste
does not make it less amazing that the same soil and the same sun should
“_Too_ quiet for you, I believe.”
connexions; continual engagements among them; commanding the first



not always be judged by the calendar. We may sometimes take greater
good sharp east wind blowing on you the whole time--for here are some of
Paul’s, and I should be as glad of your nurseryman and poulterer as you
A large income is the best recipe for happiness I ever heard of. It
person at your time of life, with such limited means and indifferent
look down upon anything contented with obscurity when it might rise to
chance--absolutely without chance or possibility of obtaining--but they
on purpose to bring her back.
would be in her power,” was looking at Edmund for his opinion and help.
to hear you have anything so good in the house. But Miss Price and Mr.
CHAPTER XXIII

I think he will consider it a right thing by Mrs. Grant, as well as by
voice, was always heard and attended to; and Sir Thomas came back. Her

surprise I can feel is, that this should be the _first_ time of its
“Very well, then, Fanny may go, Edmund.”
hers, for excepting the day at Sotherton, she had scarcely ever dined
there is no real occasion for your going into company in this sort of
“Oh! depend upon it, your aunt can do very well without you, or you


walk.”
But this could not impose on Fanny. She felt that the carriage was for
marriage. I hope it is not too fine; but I thought I ought to wear it as
pushing it back into its old quarters. He is here, of course. This is
party must rather forward her favourite indulgence of being suffered to
Edmund, and warmly urged by the two sisters, was soon in possession of
Mrs. Grant occupied at the tea-table, he began talking of them with more
“Poor Rushworth and his two-and-forty speeches!” continued Crawford.

the possibility of being heard by Edmund, and not at all aware of her

“The most interesting in the world,” replied her brother--“how to make
blank, Henry, if your _menus_ _plaisirs_ were to be limited to seven
Mansfield to hear you preach your first sermon. I shall come on purpose

with him. She had thought her influence more. She _had_ begun to think
another fortnight to Mansfield, and having sent for his hunters, and

not despair of their being capable of expression enough when she
never will persuade me that it is in compliment to her beauty, or that
her so much taller, and produces all these charms and graces! I do
“Moderation itself!” said Mary. “I can have no scruples now. Well, you
previous ill opinion of him to be overcome, had not her affection been
brother, the so long absent and dearly loved brother, was in England
his early examination of ship news the next morning seemed the reward of
best correspondent through a period of seven years, and the uncle who
proved to the other by the sympathetic alacrity with which they both
same William as before, and talk to him, as her heart had been yearning
and fears, plans, and solicitudes respecting that long thought of,
no subsequent connexion can justify, if such precious remains of the
Commissioner’s at Gibraltar, appeared in the same trim, I thought they

account of a shipwreck or an engagement, everybody else was attentive;
The wish was rather eager than lasting. He was roused from the reverie
English fox-chase; nor till he returned safe and well, without accident

being quick-sighted on such points, he could not avoid perceiving, in
The meeting was generally felt to be a pleasant one, being composed in a
soon found herself in the critical situation of being applied to for her
Here Fanny interposed, however, with anxious protestations of her own
competition with William, was a work of some difficulty; and as for Lady
Grant was able, at the end of the first rubber, to go to her and pay her
lost my way after passing that old farmhouse with the yew-trees, because
“I answer no such irrelevant and insidious questions; though were I to
increased.
done. And _there_ must be your approach, through what is at present the
that very little of your plan for Thornton Lacey will ever be put in
to secure it. Another deal proceeded, and Crawford began again about
farmhouse: it is a solid, roomy, mansion-like looking house, such as
house receive such an air as to make its owner be set down as the
will certainly be yours.”
withdrawn. With something of consciousness he shook his head at his
received by both. Your cousins are not of a sort to forget their
soon have more convenient opportunities of meeting; but my daughters

that friendship and intimacy with the Mansfield Park family which was
Sir Thomas, politely bowing, replied, “It is the only way, sir, in which
eight miles, will be an unwelcome contraction of our family circle; but

whom, having never before understood that Thornton was so soon and so
find it necessary to come to a conclusion, and be able to refresh her
“But you do not wish yourself at Portsmouth, William?”
you must try to make up your mind to it as one of the hardships which
had any suspicion of, and each found it necessary to talk of something

other time. There is _one_ person in company who does not like to have
Mrs. Norris.
her shoulders was seized by Mr. Crawford’s quicker hand, and she was
his nephew had said, he added, “I do not like, William, that you

others, before their happiness and thanks were all expressed.
day was settled too. Sir Thomas had been amusing himself with shaping a
and many a young lady went to bed that night with her head full of happy

as himself, and they were to receive ordination in the course of the
doubt and alarm intermingled with his hopes; and when he thought of
her eyes sparkle as she spoke of the dear friend’s letter, which claimed
With such matters to ponder over, and arrange, and re-arrange, Edmund
unable to satisfy herself as to what she ought to wear, determined to
and after a moment’s thought, urged Fanny’s returning with her in a much
answered by having a small trinket-box placed before her, and being
ball, and herself, as to be finally successful. Fanny found
obliged to some other person. But this was an unworthy feeling. Miss
and embarrassment quite diverting to her companion, she laid down the
believing her, “to convince me that you suspect no trick, and are as
happy thanks accepted the necklace again, for there was an expression in

in, was making use of your inkstand to explain my errand. You will find

help bursting forth again, “Oh, this is beautiful indeed! This is the
her to bring down her mind from its heavenly flight by saying, “But what

account, it ought not to prevent you from keeping it. No doubt it is
to do, to-morrow evening, and let the chain, which was not ordered with
a stab, for it told of his own convictions and views. They were
would be a presumption for which she had not words strong enough to
reading with the tenderest emotion these words, “My very dear Fanny,

was invited to dine with him at the Admiral’s. The proposal was a very
deriving some accession of pleasure from its writer being himself to go
wrong and being looked at. To dance without much observation or any
a parting worry to dress, moved as languidly towards her own room, and

she was expected to speak, to utter something like an inquiry as to the
“Oh yes, yes! and it will be a day of pleasure. It will all end right. I


the more by the recollection of the faults she once had. You are the

she did not dislike her own looks; and when she came to the necklaces

Her uncle and both her aunts were in the drawing-room when Fanny went
your own generous present to her when dear Mrs. Rushworth married. What
her steps about the drawing-room as long as she could be safe from the

comfortable. Fanny felt the advantage; and, drawing back from the toils
a moment at her necklace, with a smile--she thought there was a
compliments and insinuations to Fanny were forgotten: she felt only one
In a few minutes Sir Thomas came to her, and asked if she were engaged;
hazard another word; and she found herself the next moment conducted by
in that house before, the present arrangement was almost more than she
himself for having supplied everything else: education and manners she
she was really pleased to have Fanny admired; but she was so much more
misinterpreting Fanny’s blushes, still thought she must be doing so when
Crawford wondered she did not smile, and thought her over-anxious,
walk about with him and hear his account of his partners; she was happy
sober tranquillity as might satisfy any looker-on that Sir Thomas had


Fanny was too urgent, however, and had too many tears in her eyes for
would be. His niece, meanwhile, did not thank him for what he had just
the five or six determined couple who were still hard at work; and then,
The ball was over, and the breakfast was soon over too; the last kiss
Fanny’s disposition was such that she could never even think of her
heard about one of the Miss Maddoxes, or what it was that Lady Prescott
quite stupid. It must be sitting up so late last night. Fanny, you must
A good night’s rest improved her spirits. She could think of William the
without such wretched feelings as she had formerly known.
This wish was levelled principally at Julia, who had just applied for
Sir Thomas immediately improved this compliment by adding, “Very true.
would not think of asking her to live there; and I am sure she is better
have devised anything more likely to raise his consequence than this
had used some strong, some contemptuous expressions in speaking of the
Owen had sisters; he might find them attractive. But, at any rate, his
how do _you_ like your cousin Edmund’s staying away so long? Being the
case. I am looking for Henry every day, and as soon as he comes there

appear gay and unconcerned, “which every woman who plays herself is sure
do not like the idea of leaving Mrs. Grant now the time draws near. She
power from one who she thought must know, and her spirits were clouded
“No,” said Fanny stoutly, “I do not expect it at all.”
CHAPTER XXX
the sweep, and cried out, “My dear Henry, where can you have been
consciousness might suggest, a suspicion of his having any such views
match for her! My dearest Henry, this must be my _first_ feeling; but
is what took you to London! This was your business! You chose to consult
“Well, well, I am satisfied. I know now to whom it must relate, and am
“For--for very little more than opportunity. Mary, she is not like her
Fanny’s beauty of face and figure, Fanny’s graces of manner and goodness
in a wife, though he was too little accustomed to serious reflection to
Price as the girl most likely to attach you, I am now persuaded she is


me. Few fathers would have let me have my own way half so much. You must
Price happy, or of ceasing to love Fanny Price, was of course the
power over my heart ever ceasing.”
her feelings more lasting than other women’s, though _I_ was the object

letters, said, with a most animated look, “I must acknowledge myself
undertaken, the promotion of young Price, and enclosing two more, one
“I will not talk of my own happiness,” said he, “great as it is, for I
trusting that many posts would not pass before I should be followed by

imperfectly even to what he told her of William, and saying only when
gallantry, which meant only to deceive for the hour; she could not but
everything, to her acceptance. It was so; he had said it. Her
mind, to stand in the way of the happiness he sought, was a cruel

feel as if nothing had occurred to vex her, till she found, towards the
there was no consciousness of past folly in his voice. She opened her
These were not expressions to do Fanny any good; for though she read
immediately directed towards her.
difference in _her_ presents too. She was very glad that she had given
London either!”
“Very true, sister, as you say. But, poor things! they cannot help
where pains had been taken to please him; who thought so slightly, so
cousins and fifty other women.
embarrassment and of wanting to get away--“I will write directly.”
the sort, that I hope you will excuse my begging you to take no farther
“Oh! I thank you; I have quite done, just done; it will be ready in a
imposed on nor gratified by Mr. Crawford’s attentions.
long.
without her being obliged to know anything of the matter.
said, with much surprise, “Why have you no fire to-day?”
sit, be it only half an hour a day, without a fire. You are not strong.
been, and I believe _has_ _been_, carried too far in your case. I
to you for a few minutes, but I will not detain you long.”
make decided proposals for her, and entreat the sanction of the uncle,
satisfactory, I may execute the remainder by prevailing on you to
“I do not catch your meaning,” said Sir Thomas, sitting down again. “Out
him never to talk to me in that manner again. I am sure I said as much
“Yes, sir.”
no other. It is very uncertain when my interest might have got William
“Oh yes, sir! indeed I do. His attentions were always--what I did not
niece was deep in thought likewise, trying to harden and prepare herself
his dispositions and habits, as much more likely to marry early than
“No, sir.”
use, I perceive, to talk to you. We had better put an end to this most
I had imagined. The advantage or disadvantage of your family, of your
in the world without being addressed by a man of half Mr. Crawford’s

“If it were possible for me to do otherwise” said she, with another
cheered it, “Well,” said he, in a tone of becoming gravity, but of less
interview. With a few words, therefore, of no particular meaning, he
In about a quarter of an hour her uncle returned; she was almost
a claim too just to be denied. But there is no time fixed; perhaps
Norris’s interminable reproaches! he left her in a glow of gratitude.
into the East room again, the first thing which caught her eye was a
any; but her aunt was soon quarrelling with her; and when she found how
Thomas.
himself, and he tried to turn the conversation: tried repeatedly
hopeless, and how wicked it was to marry without affection.
minutes afterwards, and advancing decidedly towards herself, said,

convinced him that he should be able in time to make those feelings what
resolutions. He knew not that he had a pre-engaged heart to attack.
situation was new and animating.
being anything uncongenial in their characters, or anything unfriendly
were apparently become all that was honourable and upright, whose views
whole was a manner so pitying and agitated, and words intermingled with
How evidently was there a gross want of feeling and humanity where his
Mr. Crawford, and received his account. The first feeling was
of all who loved her must incline one way.
extraordinary young man, and whatever be the event, you must feel that
“My dear,” interrupted Sir Thomas, “there is no occasion for this. Your
Fanny, this subject is closed between us.”
another concern. It would not be fair to inquire into a young lady’s
deprecated her mistaken but well-meaning zeal. Sir Thomas, indeed, was,
Sir Thomas gave her more credit for discretion on the occasion than she
Fanny, I have had a very agreeable surprise this morning. I must just
aware, Fanny, that it is every young woman’s duty to accept such a very
afterwards added, “And will tell you what, Fanny, which is more than I
himself receiving a welcome, unquestionably friendly, from the woman
help the joy, he found in it a source of most gratifying sensation and
He was not intending, however, by such action, to be conveying to her
affection, it would appear that their dispositions were as exactly
possibility of it, resting upon her embarrassment only; if there was
apparently deep tranquillity.
he had got the very speech. Not a look or an offer of help had Fanny
acting before her again; nay, perhaps with greater enjoyment, for it

“from one’s earliest years. His celebrated passages are quoted

“Do you, ma’am?” cried he, with quickness. “No, no, that will never be.
some instances almost unnatural, degree of ignorance and uncouthness
reading, and preaching was preaching. It is different now. The subject
delivered, shewing it to be a subject on which he had thought before,
“Are you sure you did not speak? I saw your lips move. I fancied you
thoroughly well delivered, is a capital gratification. I can never hear
life without a sort of envy. But then, I must have a London audience.
earnestly trying to bury every sound of the business from himself in
I was wrong. I want to be set right. Nay, nay, I entreat you; for one

to keep it up; and poor Fanny, who had hoped to silence him by such an
endeavour to convince you I am wronged; it is not by telling you that my
 (seeing her draw back displeased), “forgive me. Perhaps I have as yet
at liberty, she was busy, she was protected.
never be touched on by him; but after a day or two of mutual reserve, he
Edmund was not unwilling to be persuaded to engage in the business; he
“I am come to walk with you, Fanny,” said he. “Shall I?” Drawing her
“Not of facts, perhaps; but of feelings, Fanny. No one but you can tell

of a question? It is disgraceful to us if it does. You did not love him;
“Oh! never, never, never! he never will succeed with me.” And she spoke
animate and inanimate, which so many years’ growth have confirmed, and
I consider it as quite impossible we should ever be tolerably happy
in the smallest degree make against the probability of your happiness
dined at the Parsonage only the preceding day.


his proper estimation of the blessing of domestic happiness and pure
himself to such a creature--to a woman who, firm as a rock in her own

to know her sentiments; but I had not been in the room five minutes
prepared for that. She calls herself very angry, but you can imagine her
sisterly cordiality.”
not being approved, not being loved by some one of her sex at least, let
sisters should consider me as well as him. The higher his deserts, the
could tolerate nothing that you were not used to; and a great deal more
to forbear all farther discussion; and not even to mention the name
enough.”

consideration of his being in love with her, and then a return of
them were over. There was nothing to be done, however, but to submit
Miss Crawford did come; and the first misery over, and Miss Crawford
able to help beginning directly. She said nothing, however, but, “Sad,
came too; and we had a rehearsal. You were our audience and prompter.
curious, very curious, that we should have such a scene to play! If I
“but it is over now; so let us sit down and be comfortable; for as to
Fanny.”
_she_ was rather my most particular friend of the two, but I have not

likely, wish me in Northamptonshire again; for there is a daughter of
to make the best of it. There is a spirit of irritation which, to say
she was decidedly in favour of Mr. Fraser. This seems as if nothing were

ashamed to say that it had never entered my head, but I was delighted to
but see that Mr. Crawford allowed himself in gallantries which did mean

commission.”
she sat thinking deeply of it till Mary, who had been first watching
eldest cousin, and the Rushworths, and Julia, I am sure of meeting again
It was over, and she had escaped without reproaches and without
of friendship had passed.
knew whether there were any difference in her spirits or not. She

business relative to Thornton Lacey were completed--perhaps within a
influence in this season of love had already done so little in clearing
craving for their return; and he was soon afterwards able to account for
two, and sees others made commanders before him? So reasoned Edmund,
communicated to his son; for his prime motive in sending her away had
the wiser and happier woman, all her life, for the experiment he had
visions of enjoyment so suddenly opened, she could speak more largely
allowed to make her absence three) must do her good. At a distance,
any measure, he could always carry it through; and now by dint of long
called it a sacrifice, and demanded it of her goodness and self-command
to have been her own fault or her own fancy. She had probably alienated
which he quite longed to shew her.
their journey, for when the mode of it came to be talked of, and Mrs.
William and Fanny were horror-struck at the idea.
expenses back again. So her poor dear sister Price was left to all the
about Miss Crawford; and Fanny was the more affected from feeling it to
of time and variation of circumstances occasion in this world of
the morning; and when the small, diminished party met at breakfast,
he was full of frolic and joke in the intervals of their higher-toned
of an age to be all for love, and therefore unable to blame; and knowing
much of Mansfield in every letter, that Fanny could not but suppose it
a comfortable meal, uniting dinner and supper, wound up the enjoyments
telling the news than giving them any help, immediately began with, “The
farther particulars of the Thrush’s going out of harbour, in which
for a moment expecting to be invited on; but when she saw there was
the best; and making light of his own inconvenience in being obliged to
began to think you would never come. Betsey and I have been watching for
Betsey went with alacrity, proud to shew her abilities before her fine
came to be paid; then there was a squabble between Sam and Rebecca about
Spithead by six, so you had better go with him. I have been to Turner’s
between her and the Cleopatra, just to the eastward of the sheer hulk.”
absence and long journey.
wanted to keep by her, to try to trace the features of the baby she had
but essential alteration of his uniform waistcoat, which he had been
bear it. _Within_ the room all was tranquil enough, for Susan having
have Mansfield forgotten; the friends who had done so much--the dear,
shall be after you.”
she put the kettle on the fire and glanced at her sister, as if divided
sensible countenance; she was like William, and Fanny hoped to find her
getting her to Spithead to see the sloop.
when Rebecca had been prevailed on to carry away the tea-things,
to depose, and little Betsey a great deal more, and who did seem so
remedy found for some of these evils. As she now sat looking at Betsey,

“Now, Susan,” cried Mrs. Price, in a complaining voice, “now, how can
godmother. Aunt Norris lives too far off to think of such little people
being allowed to sit up only one hour extraordinary in honour of sister,

during those days she had seen him only twice, in a short and
father, her confidence had not been sanguine, but he was more negligent
more and more dear, her daughter never met with greater kindness from
whether helping, or reprimanding, or indulging them, without any power
a partial, ill-judging parent, a dawdle, a slattern, who neither taught


its happy ways. Everything where she now was in full contrast to it. The
were trifling, they were as a drop of water to the ocean, compared with

there will be no little offering of love at the end, no three or four
best looks of the two, at least after you were spoken of. There was no
A poor honourable is no catch, and I cannot imagine any liking in the
correspondence with her aunt Bertram was her only concern of higher

yielding temper would have shrunk from asserting. Susan tried to be
was wrong, however, at times very wrong, her measures often ill-chosen
ever on the sore subject of the silver knife, canvassed as it now was
source of domestic altercation was entirely done away, and it was the
mildly and considerately as not to irritate an imperfect temper, and she
disturbance of the house; Fanny had peace, and Susan learned to think it
in view in her choice! But so it was. Susan had read nothing, and Fanny

door, a duty which always interested her beyond any other.
While trying to keep herself alive, their visitor, who had at first
found her. She might scold herself for the weakness, but there was no
his arrival, but had no object of that kind in coming.
nay, it seemed a relief to her worn mind to be at any certainty; and the
of attending them?” Mrs. Price was greatly obliged and very complying.
match; and yet, though she had been so much wanting his affection to
was not a single oath to be heard. Such was his instinctive compliment
came out expressly to visit; and it did not delay them long, for Fanny
yourselves; keep a sharp lookout!” he would give them his particular
eyes and ears; and there was no introducing the main point before her.
him against the deserving; and he had determined to go himself, and
would make Everingham and all about it a dearer object than it had ever
and led the way to her fond exclamations in praise of its beauties and
will be comprised in those houses! And at Michaelmas, perhaps, a fourth
back, Mr. Crawford contrived a minute’s privacy for telling Fanny that
Before they parted, she had to thank him for another pleasure, and one
only from natural delicacy, but _he_ had been brought up in a school of
Fanny, and on this Sunday she felt it more than ever. Her poor mother
with them, and made one in the family party on the ramparts.

beauty of the weather would soon have been knocked up now.
much greater.

months is an ample allowance; I should think six weeks quite enough.
Fanny thanked him, but tried to laugh it off.

to displace _me_; but it would be simple to be duped by a man who has no
“Is there nothing I can do for you in town?”
three hours as he could, with his other acquaintance, till the best
both mind and body, into a much juster value for Mr. Crawford’s good
them, spent the long, long evening there; and from six o’clock till

except this said visit to Portsmouth, and these two said walks, and his
as it ought to be, in a style that any of her connexions must have been
nowadays to tell tales, but--but--but Yours affectionately.”
some business that _you_ approve; but this cannot possibly be permitted
likely to lessen more, or to recover itself, were subjects for endless
ashamed of her. Those parts of the letter which related only to Mr.
not command her attention as she wished. If Mr. Crawford remembered her
much less inclined to sedentary pursuits, or to information for
well-appointed, was eager to hear, and Fanny could not but indulge
to such a measure would have been the greatest increase of all her own
“My Dear Fanny,--Excuse me that I have not written before. Crawford told
returned since Saturday. I was three weeks in London, and saw her (for
disproportion of age, but to her being, after all, less affluent than
not say this, but I do believe it. I am convinced that she is not
would be to give up the society of some of those most dear to me; to
everything, I think a letter will be decidedly the best method of
sister in the same room without recollecting what you once told me,
business in town. You are happy at Portsmouth, I hope, but this must
Fanny checked the tendency of these thoughts as well as she could, but
the world whom he could ever think of as a wife.’ I firmly believe it.
Everybody at all addicted to letter-writing, without having much to say,
being so soon to lose all the benefit of Dr. Grant’s gouty symptoms and
eldest son, of which they had received notice by express a few hours
exceedingly, and we cannot prevent ourselves from being greatly alarmed
genuine than her aunt’s style of writing. She felt truly for them all.
appearance. Then a letter which she had been previously preparing for
he was in a more alarming state than ever. They were all very seriously
trouble.”

harassed by alarms which, it was to be hoped, would prove unfounded;
attendant, supporter, cheerer of a suffering brother. There was not only
my mind, and fear to trust the influence of friends. When Tom is better,
to her. The end of April was coming on; it would soon be almost three
Mansfield. _That_ was now the home. Portsmouth was Portsmouth; Mansfield
of hearing her. They were perfectly free from any jealousy of Mansfield.
incitements to regret were feeble, compared with what arose from the
carried.
respectable, the most respectable part of her character; her friendship
want to know the state of things at Mansfield Park, and you, no doubt,
agitated on the subject. Fanny, Fanny, I see you smile and look cunning,
Had the Grants been at home I would not have troubled you, but you are
illness?--Yours ever, Mary.”
all again, and a little addition of society might be of infinite use to
present moment, she saw so much to condemn: the sister’s feelings,
she must suppose her return would be unwelcome at present, and that she
As Fanny could not doubt that her answer was conveying a real
was giving her ease. This was the letter--
letter. She could only perceive that it must relate to Wimpole Street

The next day came and brought no second letter. Fanny was disappointed.
sunshine in a town. She sat in a blaze of oppressive heat, in a cloud
“And don’t they live in Wimpole Street?”
been enrolled in the lists of Hymen, and who had promised to become

doubt, she dared not indulge a hope, of the paragraph being false. Miss
to shudderings of horror; and from hot fits of fever to cold. The event
Crawford, herself, Edmund; but it was dangerous, perhaps, to tread
no second letter to explain away the first from Miss Crawford; there was
aggravation. My father is not overpowered. More cannot be hoped. He is
to her! She dreaded lest she should learn to be insensible of it. To be
the horrible story of Mrs. Rushworth--now fixed to the last point of
gratified in the first wish of her heart, and knowing nothing personally
him, with the knowledge of what he must be suffering, brought back all
having breakfasted and being quite ready in half an hour. He had already
Fanny’s last meal in her father’s house was in character with her first:
his eye, revived an affectionate smile, which comforted her; but the
them, almost knocked up, to Oxford; but the second was over at a much
clothed, were in that delightful state when farther beauty is known to
to meet her; came with no indolent step; and falling on her neck, said,
everything that passed. The being left with her sister and nephew, and
Susan too was a grievance. She had not spirits to notice her in more
up, or wholly occupied each with the person quite dependent on them, at
of guilt and infamy.
Mrs. Rushworth had gone, for the Easter holidays, to Twickenham, with
daughter to put an end to the intimacy which was already exposing her to

last speaker, by the person who could get hold of and shut him up, the
regularly sent off to her husband; and Julia’s elopement, the additional
Every other child must be racking his heart. His displeasure against
aware of what Edmund must be suffering on his own behalf, in addition
be assured of it. If he would now speak to her with the unreserve which
everything told; no one else in the room, except his mother, who,
see her. He had received a note from Lady Stornaway to beg him to call;
she began, but how she went on, Fanny, is not fit, is hardly fit to be
“I will tell you everything, and then have done for ever. She saw it
very rationally. But she has always done justice to you. ‘He has thrown
all her fault. Simple girl! I shall never forgive her. Had she accepted
treat the subject as she did. She was speaking only as she had been used

liberality and candour on those points than formerly. What I advise
mind into that house as I had done, that anything could occur to make
grievously convinced me that I had never understood her before, and
it. She would have laughed if she could. It was a sort of laugh, as she
to me. I resisted; it was the impulse of the moment to resist, and still
at liberty to speak openly, felt more than justified in adding to
never could get entirely the better of; and as to his ever meeting with
distress of those around her. She had sources of delight that must force
Sir Thomas, poor Sir Thomas, a parent, and conscious of errors in his
rate, there was comfort in finding his estate rather more, and his debts
dependence on such sources of good, Edmund was contributing to his
flattery of their aunt had been continually contrasted with his own
alone suffice. They had been instructed theoretically in their religion,
The high spirit and strong passions of Mrs. Rushworth, especially, were
marriage contracted under such circumstances as to make any better end
with the demerits of her niece, would have had her received at home
anywise accessory to introducing such misery in another man’s family as
either time had done her much disservice, or that he had considerably
That Julia escaped better than Maria was owing, in some measure, to a
in order to secure herself from being again too much attracted. This had
happiness. Could he have been satisfied with the conquest of one
Everingham after his return from Portsmouth, he might have been deciding

regretting Fanny even at the moment, but regretting her infinitely more
estimable, and endeared acquaintance, and so lost the woman whom he had
regret from the scenes and people she had been used to; but the same

to time in different people. I only entreat everybody to believe that
and his feelings exactly in that favourable state which a recent
from her should be long wanting. Timid, anxious, doubting as she was, it
prizing more and more the sterling good of principle and temper, and
it. He might have made her childhood happier; but it had been an error
her substitute, she was established at Mansfield, with every appearance

been.

could read his own history with an interest which never failed.  This
Esq. of Uppercross, in the county of Somerset," and by inserting most

pardoned the youthful infatuation which made her Lady Elliot, had never

one daughter, his eldest, he would really have given up any thing,

neither ill health nor anxiety, it is a time of life at which scarcely
had she been doing the honours, and laying down the domestic law at
own birth and see no marriage follow but that of a youngest sister,
Walter had sought the acquaintance, and though his overtures had not
inferior birth.
family pride could see only in him a proper match for Sir Walter
to alloy, the agitations to vary, the sameness and the elegance, the
had been constantly exceeding it.  It had not been possible for him to
extent of the evil, the whole of which Sir Walter found himself obliged
neighbouring market town, and Lady Russell, were called to advise them;
judgement of Lady Russell, from whose known good sense he fully
cultivated mind, and was, generally speaking, rational and consistent;
never seemed considered by the others as having any interest in the
he be doing, in fact, but what very many of our first families have
highly; and as to the severe degree of self-denial which her own

settled, and the first outline of this important change made out.
at comparatively little expense.  Two material advantages of Bath over
there, after her mothers death; and secondly, from her happening to be
beginning.  He was not only to quit his home, but to see it in the
How quick come the reasons for approving what we like!  Lady Russell
Elizabeth deserved it.  She had never received from her more than
unequal, and in her character she believed a very dangerous companion;
very responsible tenants.  Many a noble fortune has been made during
Therefore, Sir Walter, what I would take leave to suggest is, that if

about the house would be taken such excellent care of!  The gardens and
favour, I assure you, be he sailor or soldier."
privileges which any home can give.  Sailors work hard enough for their
their fathers and grandfathers never dreamt of; and secondly, as it
Basil, it is Admiral Baldwin.  What do you take his age to be?
in active service, are not at all better off:  and even in the quieter
something of their personableness when they cease to be quite young."
Kellynch Hall being to let, and understanding his (Mr Shepherds)
and has been in the East Indies since; he was stationed there, I
took out a gun, but never killed; quite the gentleman.
taxes, than the Admiral himself, and seemed more conversant with

"Wentworth was the very name!  Mr Wentworth was the very man.  He had
formed of Kellynch Hall, and extreme solicitude for the advantage of
than Admiral Croft bid fair to be, could hardly offer.  So far went his
Mr Shepherd was completely empowered to act; and no sooner had such an
the summer of 1806; and having no parent living, found a home for half
negative of great astonishment, great coldness, great silence, and a
one who had almost a mothers love, and mothers rights, it would be
imprudence a horror.  She deprecated the connexion in every light.
consolation was required, for she had to encounter all the additional
(except in one visit to Bath soon after the rupture), or in any novelty
partialities and injustice of her fathers house, and settled so
immediate wretchedness, such uncertain future good.  She was persuaded
have made a handsome fortune.  She had only navy lists and newspapers
herself it was folly, before she could harden her nerves sufficiently
had been long removed from the country and being a sensible man, and,

could not but influence Sir Walter, who had besides been flattered into
the park, "I thought we should soon come to a deal, my dear, in spite
unable to give the full invitation she wished, and Anne though dreading
"I cannot possibly do without Anne," was Marys reasoning; and
So far all was perfectly right; but Lady Russell was almost startled by
possible.  She did not imagine that her father had at present an idea
for each partys perfectly knowing their situation.
personal misfortunes, though I know you must fifty times.  That tooth
Anne had done; glad that it was over, and not absolutely hopeless of
worse to anticipate the new hands they were to fall into; and to escape
his residence, and Uppercross Cottage, with its veranda, French
self-importance, was very prone to add to every other distress that of
"Yes, I made the best of it; I always do:  but I was very far from well
"Yes, as long as I could bear their noise; but they are so unmanageable
"You will see them yet, perhaps, before the morning is gone.  It is
"Dear me! what can you possibly have to do?"
one word about our dinner at the Pooles yesterday."
crowded!  They are both so very large, and take up so much room; and Mr

with a small carpet and shining floor, to which the present daughters
excepting Charles, were Henrietta and Louisa, young ladies of nineteen
They were received with great cordiality.  Nothing seemed amiss on the
idea.  She had never been staying there before, without being struck by
good situation:  none of your Queen Squares for us!" or in the anxious
least two months at Uppercross, it was highly incumbent on her to
dangerous contemplation; though, at the same time, Anne could believe,
a present was not made, he always contended for his fathers having
receiving hints to exert it, beyond what was practicable.  "I wish you
quite different creatures with you!  But to be sure, in general they
house-maid and laundry-maid, instead of being in their business, are
mentioning it."
mamma cares about it the least in the world, but I know it is taken
was certainly carried nearly as far as possible, for they met every
been always used to feel alone in the world; and Mr and Mrs Musgroves
and help play at anything, or dance anywhere; and Anne, very much
Kellynch?  I am glad I did not think of it before.  How low it makes
able to watch for a likeness, and if it failed her in the features, to
introduction, that there was not the smallest symptom of any knowledge
that she had said nothing which might not do for either brother. She
&c., to have another moment for finishing or recollecting what he had

the very man, and her head is quite full of it, and of poor Richard!
thick-headed, unfeeling, unprofitable Dick Musgrove, who had never done
were they in the habit of attending to such matters, so unobservant and
companions could give them.
perfectly well-spelt praise, as "a fine dashing felow, only two
the end of another week.  It had been a great disappointment to Mr
even in the midst of the serious anxiety which they afterwards felt on
Till he came and had examined the child, their apprehensions were the
farther pressing invitations to come and dine with them on the
boy," both father and mother were in much too strong and recent alarm
Musgrove began, consequently, to feel no necessity for longer

think Charles would have been so unfeeling.  So here he is to go away
"I hope I am as fond of my child as any mother, but I do not know that
"Well, if you do not think it too late to give notice for yourself,
and get ready directly.  You can send for us, you know, at a moments
deal better, for I have not dined at the other house since Tuesday."
she was left with as many sensations of comfort, as were, perhaps, ever
laughing, all that was most agreeable; charming manners in Captain

two minutes after Charless preparation, the others appeared; they were
met.  They had been once more in the same room.
avoid her?  And the next moment she was hating herself for the folly
wound.




of the first evening they spent together: and though his voice did not
in unison, no countenances so beloved.  Now they were as strangers;

ships that Captain Wentworth had commanded.
distinguish the very set who may be least missed."
half a year together?  If a man had not a wife, he soon wants to be
entertaining, I had the good luck in my passage home the next autumn,
with our poor boy. Charles, my dear," (beckoning him to her), "do ask
The girls were now hunting for the Laconia; and Captain Wentworth could
"And I am sure, Sir," said Mrs Musgrove, "it was a lucky day for us,

made room for him; they were divided only by Mrs Musgrove.  It was no

hours might comprehend.
in England.  I believe I have lived as much on board as most women, and
from the worlds end, if he wanted it.  But do not imagine that I did
"But I hate to hear you talking so like a fine gentleman, and as if
again, Yes, you will, and there is an end of it."
herself of having ever called them anything in the whole course of her
myself at Deal, when the Admiral (Captain Croft then) was in the North
employed, and desired nothing in return but to be unobserved.
were mechanically at work, proceeding for half an hour together,
immediately drew back with a decided negative, he was not to be induced
that country, but the attractions of Uppercross induced him to put this
Hitherto there had been but one opinion of Captain Wentworth among the

pleased to improve their cousins.  Charless attentions to Henrietta
confidence in the discretion of both their daughters, and of all the
fortune at once; besides which, there would be the chance of what might
it would be quite a misfortune to have the existing connection between

marry Charles Hayter; and if she has him, and Louisa can get Captain

heart to sympathize in any of the sufferings it occasioned; but if
of his office, but was now growing too infirm for many of them, should

himself, and feel how he ought to behave.
house; but it proved to be one much less calculated for making matters
him by some one without, made his determined appearance among them, and
"Walter," cried Charles Hayter, "why do you not do as you are bid?  Do
relief, the manner, the silence in which it had passed, the little
Wentworth should do what he ought to have done himself.  But neither
where she knew it would have satisfied neither husband nor wife; for
accepting must be the word) of two young women at once.
sitting quietly at work, they were visited at the window by the sisters
Musgroves much more cordial invitation to herself to go likewise, as
feelings of interest and curiosity, she fancied now that it was too
musings and quotations; but it was not possible, that when within reach
often, I assure you; but my sister makes nothing of it; she would as
scenes of autumn were for a while put by, unless some tender sonnet,

of calling on his aunt, now that he was so near; and very evidently,
Mary took the opportunity of looking scornfully around her, and saying
degrees quite out of sight and sound, Mary was happy no longer; she
speech.  What Anne first heard was--
"Happy for her, to have such a mind as yours at hand!  After the hints
a nut," said he, catching one down from an upper bough, "to exemplify:
be seen.  While she remained, a bush of low rambling holly protected

of very painful import.  She saw how her own character was considered
gentlemans side, and a relenting on the ladys, and that they were now
shewn herself disobliging to him, and was now to reap the consequence,
kindly offered a seat to any lady who might be particularly tired; it
four.  You must, indeed, you must."
understood him.  He could not forgive her, but he could not be
"He certainly means to have one or other of those two girls, Sophy,"
to wait for besides?  I do not like having such things so long in hand.
hand they neither fell into a rut, nor ran foul of a dung-cart; and
It would place her in the same village with Captain Wentworth, within
now could do any good; and were Lady Russell to see them together, she
last, had brought intelligence of Captain Harvilles being settled with
short, Louisa, who was the most eager of the eager, having formed the
House at rather an early breakfast hour, and set off very punctually,
almost hurrying into the water, the walk to the Cobb, skirting round
first partial falling of the cliff prepared the ground for such a

or two waiting for fortune and promotion.  Fortune came, his
country, and the retirement of Lyme in the winter, appeared exactly
face and a melancholy air, just as he ought to have, and drew back from
There was so much attachment to Captain Wentworth in all this, and such
lodging-house furniture, and defend the windows and doors against the
usefulness and ingenuity seemed to furnish him with constant employment
already, that nothing was found amiss; though its being "so entirely
being oppressed by the presence of so many strangers.  He ventured
had probably no concern in, she had the hope of being of real use to
did not always read only poetry, and to say, that she thought it was


twelve-month.  He declares himself, that coming to Lyme for a month,
could be no difficulty at his time of life, and with his character.  My
Dr Shirley to repose as she ought; saw how very desirable it was that
views should have placed her friend at all in favour with any of the
features, having the bloom and freshness of youth restored by the fine
strolling about near the two inns as they came back, should be his
The word curricle made Charles Musgrove jump up that he might compare

hear, did not his servant say whether he belonged to the Kellynch
wonder the arms did not strike me!  Oh! the great-coat was hanging over
have seen her cousin, and to know that the future owner of Kellynch was
ought to be suppressed.  The offence which had been given her father,
disincline him to seek her again; and they walked together some time,
a young mourner--only last summer, I understand."
day till he got to Portsmouth, rowed off to the Grappler that instant,
but as they drew near the Cobb, there was such a general wish to walk
for the ladies, and they agreed to get down the steps to the lower, and
Captain Wentworth, who had caught her up, knelt with her in his arms,
her temples; here are salts; take them, take them."

could not give.


apparent consciousness.  This had been a proof of life, however, of
be conceived.
Harvilles silenced all scruples; and, as much as they could, all

Charles agreed, but declared his resolution of not going away.  He

recollected himself and moved away.  She expressed herself most
and to be soon followed by the two ladies.  When the plan was made
the little circumstances which the same spots had witnessed earlier in
astonishment, the expressions begun and suppressed, with which Charles
manners; what was to be their sort of intercourse, she could not
justness of his own previous opinion as to the universal felicity and
once addressed by Captain Wentworth.  In a low, cautious voice, he
daughter all the better for being with them, he announced his intention
future, which, in Mr and Mrs Musgroves distressed state of spirits,
but the truth was, that Mrs Harville left nothing for anybody to do."
have been resolved on, and found practicable so soon.
to-morrow, fix themselves at the inn, or get into lodgings, as it
If Louisa recovered, it would all be well again.  More than former
the village, without a saddened heart.  Scenes had passed in Uppercross
There was some anxiety mixed with Lady Russells joy in meeting her.
satisfaction in the house in Camden Place, which had been taken, and
Captain Wentworths name must be mentioned by both.  Anne was conscious
found their way to Anne, she could not tell how, and brought a rather
opinion of the Crofts, and considered her father so very fortunate in
had no sigh of that description to heave.
exertions, and had spoken of those exertions as great.  This was
Miss Elliot?  This is breaking a head and giving a plaster, truly!"
any time; and there you will find we keep our umbrellas hanging up by
done, and that Mr Shepherd thinks it the greatest improvement the house
and the Admiral, fearing he might not have been civil enough, took up
present; for when it was returned, the Crofts announced themselves to
Though Charles and Mary had remained at Lyme much longer after Mr and
Harvilles, while the Harvilles had been wanting them to come to dinner
and there were a great many more people to look at in the church at
finding it dull; but upon my word I should have thought we were lively
She boldly acknowledged herself flattered, and continued her enquiries.
heard it myself, and you were in the other room.  Elegance, sweetness,
told him the distance and the road, and I told him of the churchs

"Yes, that he will!" exclaimed Mary, tauntingly.  "He will sit poring
Lady Russell began talking of something else.  Mary spoke with
had been the first week.  He had not seen Louisa; and was so extremely
imagined, or he was too shy; and after giving him a weeks indulgence,

domestic hurricane a bad restorative of the nerves, which Louisas
they were reseated in the carriage, "not to call at Uppercross in the

very wonderful if it were true; and Lady Russell was in a state of very


over all the others which they had either seen or heard of, and the
had been mistress of Kellynch Hall, finding extent to be proud of
completely re-established.
opinions on the subject.
She had sought him.  Without that attraction, not all her money would
She heard it all under embellishment.  All that sounded extravagant or
well-bred, elegant manners, and her character might never have been
appearance, his air of elegance and fashion, his good shaped face, his
daily expectation of her confinement; but Mr Elliot spoke of her as "a
dreadful multitude of ugly women in Bath; and as for the men!  they

into the room.
eyes brightened! and with the most perfect alacrity he welcomed the
especially wanting to speak of the circumstance of their happening to
"The notions of a young man of one or two and twenty," said he, "as to
Mr Elliot to Lady Russell, in the wish of really comprehending what had

from us now.  You must stay to be acquainted with Mrs Wallis, the
"No, nothing at all."  "Ha! he was surprised at that;" and added,
on this point, in her intercourse in Camden Place.  The sight of Mrs
lived with the liberality of a man of fortune, without display; he
surprise her, therefore, that Lady Russell should see nothing
habit of such general observance as "Miss Elliot," that any
times.  He gave her to understand that he had looked at her with some
Anne had never seen her father and sister before in contact with
the head of the sinner; for when poor Lady Elliot died herself, no
very fine letter of ample explanation, regret, and entreaty, to his
of "a charming woman," because she had a smile and a civil answer for

must all wish for."
"Well," said Anne, "I certainly am proud, too proud to enjoy a welcome
He looked, as he spoke, to the seat which Mrs Clay had been lately

said to have married a man of fortune, and this was all that Anne had
Miss Elliot would give Mrs Smith, and Anne therefore lost no time in
transformed the fine-looking, well-grown Miss Hamilton, in all the glow
Annes astonishment increased.  She could scarcely imagine a more
resolution, but here was something more; here was that elasticity of
that moment particularly unfit to meet any extraordinary expense.  She
to one or two very poor families in this neighbourhood.  She had a
trifling and silly.  To me, who live so much alone, her conversation, I
"Yes," said Mrs Smith more doubtingly, "sometimes it may, though I fear
"I do not suppose the situation my friend Mrs Rooke is in at present,
home by a bad cold, was glad to make use of the relationship which had
to you.  But surely you may put off this old lady till to-morrow:  she

claims to theirs, but her sense of personal respect to her father
having been very much talked of between her friend and Mr Elliot; in
leave him at liberty to exert his most open powers of pleasing.  She

Anne was obliged to turn away, to rise, to walk to a distant table,
case was against Mr Elliot.
now think very differently, who could answer for the true sentiments of
Mr Elliot was too generally agreeable.  Various as were the tempers in
Chapter 18

"February 1st.
in Bath, with your nice pavements; but in the country it is of some
go away?  But perhaps if she were to leave the room vacant, we might
about.  I dare say I shall catch it; and my sore-throats, you know, are
have them back again.  Our neighbourhood cannot spare such a pleasant
has written his consent, and Captain Benwick is expected to-day.  Mrs
Benwick and Louisa Musgrove!  It was almost too wonderful for belief,
"Have they any acquaintance here?" asked Elizabeth.
odd-looking men walking about here, who, I am told, are sailors.  The
Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove!  The high-spirited, joyous-talking
tolerably pleasing young woman who had listened and seemed to feel for
The conclusion of the whole was, that if the woman who had been
The Crofts had placed themselves in lodgings in Gay Street, perfectly
long as she could, delighted to fancy she understood what they might be
obliged to touch as well as address him before she could catch his

How dye do?  Brigden stares to see anybody with me but my wife.
North Yarmouth and Deal.  We do not like our lodgings here the worse, I
about.  That young lady, you know, that we have all been so concerned
staying at Lyme, he went off to Plymouth, and then he went off to see

There is something about Frederick more to our taste."
This was an opportunity which Anne could not resist; she said,
she should have him."
nothing very unforgiving in that, I think."

stepped to Lady Dalrymple, to request her assistance.  He soon joined
and it was discussed between them with a generosity so polite and so
found the others still waiting for the carriage, and Mr Elliot (always
that she was betraying the least sensibility of the two.  She had the
portion of apparent indifference and calmness; but he could not do it
Lady Dalrymples carriage, for which Miss Elliot was growing very

Wentworth recollected him perfectly.  There was no difference between

Elliot.  Anne is too delicate for them."

The following morning Anne was out with her friend, and for the first
he must possess over Lady Russells mind, the difficulty it must be for
curtains hereabouts that answer their description."
course they must attend.  It was really expected to be a good one, and

Sir Walter, his two daughters, and Mrs Clay, were the earliest of all
subject; and on Captain Wentworths making a distant bow, she
you at the time."
good temper."


quite ascertained.  I had been too deeply concerned in the mischief to
not love a place the less for having suffered in it, unless it has been
advanced into the room.  The others joined them, and it was a group in
Room.  He was gone; he had disappeared, she felt a moments regret.
for which did not seem within her reach; and Anne--but it would be an
all, all declared that he had a heart returning to her at least; that
The party was divided and disposed of on two contiguous benches: Anne
words, for certainly the sense of an Italian love-song must not be
regard her as one who is too modest for the world in general to be
described by those who knew you intimately.  I have been acquainted

"A well-looking man," said Sir Walter, "a very well-looking man."
was forced to seem to restore her attention to the orchestra and look
whatever she might feel on Lady Russells account, to shrink from
which was favourable for her.  Colonel Wallis declined sitting down
degrees came at last near enough to speak to her.  She felt that
explain Italian again.  Miss Carteret was very anxious to have a

Anne recollected with pleasure the next morning her promise of going to
his for ever.  Their union, she believed, could not divide her more
she told most gladly, but the all was little for one who had been
"The Ibbotsons, were they there? and the two new beauties, with the
"Oh! you saw enough for your own amusement.  I can understand.  There

any report of Captain Wentworth could have reached her.  After another
known it, I would have had the pleasure of talking to him about you."
suppose his cousin might fairly ask of him, I beg you would not

"My dear Mrs Smith, Mr Elliots wife has not been dead much above half
safe in his character.  He will not be led astray; he will not be
not Mr Elliot; it is not Mr Elliot that--"
world to be wished for by everybody belonging to either of you; and you
who told me you were to marry Mr Elliot.  She had had it from Mrs
interest you in some circumstances; but not now.  No, I thank you, I
"Indeed!  Then do tell me what he was at that time of life.  I have a
smooth surface of family-union seems worth preserving, though there may

inferior in circumstances; he was then the poor one; he had chambers in
sort of man."
have always understood they were not a happy couple.  But I should like
concealments with me.  It was curious, that having just left you behind
Anne.  "This explains it.  I found he had been used to hear of me.  I

saleable, anybody should have his for fifty pounds, arms and motto,
which you will find on the upper shelf of the closet."
with Mr Elliot, I was determined to preserve every document of former
nevertheless, is not unlikely to marry again; he is quite fool enough.
Can any thing be stronger?"
"Can you really?"
moved away.  Mr Elliot talks unreservedly to Colonel Wallis of his
when I arrived."
somewhere down in the west, to use her own words, without knowing it
with Miss Elliot and Sir Walter as long ago as September (in short when
watching all that was going on there, and when Mr Elliot came to Bath
acquaintance, and recovering such a footing in the family as might give
"Yes," said Anne, "you tell me nothing which does not accord with what
she holds her present influence.  Mrs Wallis has an amusing idea, as
conduct will be more direct.  Mr Elliot is evidently a disingenuous,
Elliot had led his friend into expenses much beyond his fortune.  Mrs
encouraging expenses which could end only in ruin; and the Smiths
Anne was shewn some letters of his on the occasion, answers to urgent
property of her husband in the West Indies, which had been for many
with Mr Elliot.  She had previously, in the anticipation of their
recommend and praise him!"
have been persuaded by Lady Russell!  And under such a supposition,
Anne went home to think over all that she had heard.  In one point, her
springing from it!  Mrs Smith had been able to tell her what no one
"I had not the smallest intention of asking him," said Elizabeth, with

to-morrow, I had compassion on him."
father, contrasted with his former language, was odious; and when she
more solicitation; but the charm was broken: he found that the heat and
was so humiliating to reflect on the constant deception practised on
"Very well," said Elizabeth, "I have nothing to send but my love.  Oh!
observed the blinds were let down immediately."
were come to Bath for a few days with Mrs Musgrove, and were at the
something, as shooting was over, Charles had proposed coming with him,
for Henriettas wedding-clothes to be talked of.  She had imagined such
recommendation.  Not that he will value it as he ought," he observed,
have daughters shares; and I am sure he has always been a very kind,
He answered rather hesitatingly, "Yes, I believe I do; very much
I got more acquainted with him last Monday than ever I did before.  We
horses, and with her own complete independence of Camden Place, that
dinners; few people in Bath do; Lady Alicia never does; did not even
and see her and Henrietta directly.
warmth, and a sincerity which Anne delighted in the more, from the sad
an hotel ensured a quick-changing, unsettled scene.  One five minutes
to dwell much on this argument of rational dependence:--"Surely, if
"No," cried Anne, quickly, "it cannot be Mr Elliot, I assure you.  He
evident that the report concerning her had spread, and a short pause
He has changed his hour of going, I suppose, that is all, or I may be

play."

without her.  Mrs Musgrove interposed.
attempted, perhaps."  She had spoken it; but she trembled when it was
"Oh! no.  The usual character of them has nothing for me.  I am no
companions to lose no time, lest somebody else should come in.
to meet the heartless elegance of her father and sister.  How
the importance of a man of such an air and appearance as his.  The past



turned back and walked with me to the Pump Yard.  He had been prevented
One day only had passed since Annes conversation with Mrs Smith; but a
talking to Mrs Croft, and Captain Harville to Captain Wentworth; and
Materials were at hand, on a separate table; he went to it, and nearly
advantage of taste and delicacy, which good Mrs Musgrove could not
would rather have young people settle on a small income at once, and

his seat, and moved to a window, and Anne seeming to watch him, though


continual occupation and change soon weaken impressions."
have loved.  I believe the reverse.  I believe in a true analogy

in very good anchorage here," (smiling at Anne,) "well supplied, and

in, as long as it is in sight, and then turns away and says, God knows
undervalue the warm and faithful feelings of any of my
arm, quite affectionately.  "There is no quarrelling with you.  And

was himself.  He begged their pardon, but he had forgotten his gloves,
sinking into the chair which he had occupied, succeeding to the very
waited even these ten days, could I have read your feelings, as I think
minutes only which now passed before she was interrupted, with all the

night.
see them both this morning, I dare say.  Do promise me."
an engagement at a gunsmiths, to be of use to her; and she set off
"I hardly know," replied Captain Wentworth, surprised.
in and spirits dancing in private rapture.  In half a minute Charles
them, seeing neither sauntering politicians, bustling housekeepers,
had been vanquished at last by those sentiments and those tones which
at Uppercross had he learnt to do her justice, and only at Lyme had he
he had seen everything to exalt in his estimation the woman he had
no longer at my own disposal.  I was hers in honour if she wished it.
to return to Kellynch, and act as circumstances might require.
pride, and the blunders of his own calculations, till at once released
for me?"
not enough to make the fool of me which I appeared?  How could I look
I could not derive benefit from the late knowledge I had acquired of
I felt that I had still a motive for remaining here."
business, too numerous for intimacy, too small for variety; but Anne
always the hope of more, and always the knowledge of his being there.
otherwise, I should have suffered more in continuing the engagement
to you, would you have answered my letter?  Would you, in short, have
endeavour to subdue my mind to my fortune.  I must learn to brook being
of right, and one independent fortune between them, fail of bearing
flattered, to make him really happy on the occasion, was very far from
regard to both; that she had been unfairly influenced by appearances in
and if her second object was to be sensible and well-judging, her first
future to look forward to, of powerful consolation.  Anne had no
disappointed, he could still do something for his own interest and his
It cannot be doubted that Sir Walter and Elizabeth were shocked and
worth and all the prompt welcome which met her in his brothers and
property in the West Indies, by writing for her, acting for her, and
affection.  His profession was all that could ever make her friends

since it was finished, many more since it was begun, and that during
independence besides two good livings--and he was not in the least
infancy, nursing a dormouse, feeding a canary-bird, or watering a
Morland, who did not insist on her daughters being accomplished in
green slope at the back of the house.
Mrs. Morland was a very good woman, and wished to see her children



miserably short of the true heroic height. At present she did not know
to throw a hero in her way.

terrific separation must oppress her heart with sadness, and drown her
Sally, or rather Sarah (for what young lady of common gentility will

It is now expedient to give some description of Mrs. Allen, that the
to introduce a young lady into public, being as fond of going everywhere
till late. The season was full, the room crowded, and the two ladies
of the dancers but the high feathers of some of the ladies. Still they
They were not long able, however, to enjoy the repose of the eminence
Mrs. Allen congratulated herself, as soon as they were seated, on having




had their due effect; she immediately thought the evening pleasanter
attended, where they paraded up and down for an hour, looking at
fluency and spirit--and there was an archness and pleasantry in his
air, “Have you been long in Bath, madam?”
“Indeed! Have you yet honoured the Upper Rooms?”


life in Bath without one? How are the civilities and compliments of
think the superiority was always on our side.”
letters than men, than that they sing better duets, or draw better
excellent judge; and my sister has often trusted me in the choice of a
think it will wash well; I am afraid it will fray.”
are sadly off in the country; not but what we have very good shops in

a slight slumber, or a morning doze at most; for if it be true, as a
CHAPTER 4
This sentiment had been uttered so often in vain that Mrs. Allen had no
to know nothing of each other for the last fifteen years. Compliments
sit and appear to listen to all these maternal effusions, consoling
young lady observed aloud to the rest, “How excessively like her brother
etc., which Catherine heard with pleasure, and answered with all the
the opinions of her new friend in many articles of tasteful attire;
morning. Catherine then ran directly upstairs, and watched Miss Thorpe’s
the three or four following chapters; in which the worthlessness of
to be more fortunate the next day; and when her wishes for fine weather
nowhere to be met with; every search for him was equally unsuccessful,
must have been delighted with her dear Catherine, and would therefore
Thorpe!” and she was as eager in promoting the intercourse of the two
were still resolute in meeting in defiance of wet and dirt, and shut
other literary corporation in the world, no species of composition has
powers of the mind are displayed, in which the most thorough knowledge


“Yes, I have been reading it ever since I woke; and I am got to the

her as beautiful as an angel, and I am so vexed with the men for not

your feelings.”

“But it does not signify if they do,” said Catherine, very innocently.
“I hardly know. I never much thought about it. Something between both, I
Catherine, in some amazement, complied, and after remaining a few
determined I will not look up.”
Catherine readily agreed. “Only,” she added, “perhaps we may overtake
the sex, they set off immediately as fast as they could walk, in pursuit
ladies, however important their business, whether in quest of pastry,
looked again and exclaimed, “Delightful! Mr. Morland and my brother!”
expert in the development of other people’s feelings, and less simply
“I do not know the distance.” Her brother told her that it was
“Ten o’clock! It was eleven, upon my soul! I counted every stroke. This
Christchurch man, a friend of mine, a very good sort of fellow; he ran
threw down the money, and the carriage was mine.”
the gentlemen should accompany them to Edgar’s Buildings, and pay their
time.”


of a self-assured man, especially where the beauty of her own sex is
interesting.”
“Yes, that’s the book; such unnatural stuff! An old man playing at
to the feelings of the dutiful and affectionate son, as they met Mrs.
John thought her the most charming girl in the world, and by John’s
that will recommend him to your sex, I believe: and how do you like the
you wrote to me after your visit there.”
are very kind to you?”
invited by the former to dine with them, and summoned by the latter

James, who had been engaged quite as long as his sister, was very
say, “Good-bye, my dear love,” before they hurried off. The younger
minutes, to a pleasanter feeling, by seeing, not Mr. Thorpe, but Mr.
paleness and falling in a fit on Mrs. Allen’s bosom, Catherine sat
“Well, sir, and I dare say you are not sorry to be back again, for it

to her lot; nor did the particulars which he entered into while they
she was sure you would not have the least objection to letting in this
vexation on every little trifling occurrence. Catherine, interested at
knew I was in the other? I have been quite wretched without you.”
“Oh! Heavens! You don’t say so! Let me look at her this moment. What a
you, what we are talking of. Perhaps we are talking about you; therefore
partners.”
for heaven’s sake, and stand by me.” And off they went, to regain

must say it, though I am his mother, that there is not a more agreeable
besides, I am tired, and do not mean to dance any more.”

hopes and fresh schemes. The first wish of her heart was to improve her
heard a carriage in the street, or saw a speck upon her gown, she must

could at that moment bear a short delay in favour of a drive, and who
afraid you were ill. What a delightful ball we had last night. I have a
late to retreat, and she was too young to own herself frightened; so,
the animal continued to go on in the same quiet manner, without
“No--not any.”
very temperate man, and you could not fancy him in liquor last night?”
Oxford.”
This declaration brought on a loud and overpowering reply, of which
whatever he chose to assert, and it was finally settled between them

brought up to understand the propensities of a rattle, nor to know to
perfectly safe, and therefore would alarm herself no longer. By him
as were her general notions of what men ought to be, she could not
own watch, nor her brother’s, nor the servant’s; she would believe no


“Oh! A vast deal indeed; she hardly talked of anything else.”
yes, I am sure Mrs. Tilney is dead, because Mrs. Hughes told me there
nothing should have persuaded her to go out with the others; and, as
immeasurable length of time which had divided them. “Oh, heavens!
you, I can hardly exist till I see him.”
“No, indeed I should not.”
Catherine’s resolution of endeavouring to meet Miss Tilney again
time, till Catherine began to doubt the happiness of a situation which,
both parties remained in the room; and though in all probability not
think,” added Catherine after a moment’s silence, “how surprised I was


the feelings of many ladies, could they be made to understand how little
dance, her wishes, hopes, and plans all centred in nothing less. Every
and John must keep us in countenance. Make haste, my dear creature, and
her on purpose!--it did not appear to her that life could supply any
lobby for your cloak. And here have I been telling all my acquaintance
do for the field. I would give any money for a real good hunter. I
I consider a country-dance as an emblem of marriage. Fidelity and
place them in such a view. You will allow, that in both, man has the
“In one respect, there certainly is a difference. In marriage, the man
spoke to you just now were to return, or if any other gentleman were to
with courage. Do you find Bath as agreeable as when I had the honour of
they can afford to stay no longer.”
“But then you spend your time so much more rationally in the country.”

“Not those who bring such fresh feelings of every sort to it as you do.
gentleman retreated, and her partner, coming nearer, said, “I see that
find nobody to go with her, it was proposed by the brother and sister

clouds would only go off, and the sun keep out.”
“No,” replied her friend very placidly, “I know you never mind dirt.”

it looks a little lighter. There, it is twenty minutes after twelve, and

“To Bristol! Is not that a great way off? But, however, I cannot go with
“I doubt our being able to do so much,” said Morland.
“But is it like what one reads of?”
as it is so fine, I dare say they will be here soon.”
“Did you indeed?”
“I should like to see the castle; but may we go all over it? May we go

slighted by them was very painful. On the other hand, the delight of
 Catherine looked round and saw Miss Tilney leaning on her brother’s arm,
Mr. Thorpe? How could you say that you saw them driving up the Lansdown
the promised walk, and especially rather than be thought ill of by the
go. It will never do. We set out a great deal too late. We had much


Her satisfaction, too, in not being at the Lower Rooms was spoken more
offered. “Do not be so dull, my dearest creature,” she whispered. “You

herself of General Tilney’s lodgings, for though she believed they were
the house. She felt almost persuaded that Miss Tilney was at home, and
Dejected and humbled, she had even some thoughts of not going with the
recalled her to anxiety and distress. The stage could no longer excite
of seeking an explanation, and to enlighten him on the past only by
rather have been with you; now had not I, Mrs. Allen?”
I would have jumped out and run after you.”
hurried for time, and not caring to have it put off--made a point of her
angry.”
John Thorpe, who was never in the same part of the house for ten minutes
a consequential manner, whether she had seen him talking with General
as a Jew. I should like to dine with him; I dare say he gives famous
That General Tilney, instead of disliking, should admire her, was very
week. The Clifton scheme had been deferred, not relinquished, and on
their proposed walk tomorrow; it was quite determined, and she would
endearing names. She was sure her dearest, sweetest Catherine would not
to the quick, I own. These Tilneys seem to swallow up everything else.”
do, as it depended only on themselves, she could go with them, and
sisters about, and look like a fool. No, if you do not go, d---- me if I
best-tempered of my sisters.”

“This will not do,” said Catherine; “I cannot submit to this. I must run

one.
restore her composure; till she had spoken to Miss Tilney she could not
to explain it.--I did not care what you thought of me.--I would not stay
politeness as recalled Thorpe’s information to her mind, and made her
would expect her back every moment. The general declared he could say no
throughout, had carried her point, and was secure of her walk, she began
“No, certainly not; and I am glad you do not think of it. These schemes
young men, to whom they are not even related?”

spite of what had passed. Mr. Allen, however, discouraged her from doing

fulfil her engagement, though it was made with the hero himself.

“Thank you, Eleanor--a most honourable testimony. You see, Miss Morland,
Louisas. If we proceed to particulars, and engage in the never-ceasing
is treating you exactly as he does his sister. He is forever finding
in that one word.”
interested in. Can you?”
am fond of history--and am very well contented to take the false with
which, as I used to think, nobody would willingly ever look into, to be

taught, Mrs. Radcliffe would have written in vain--or perhaps might not
of a fine day. She was heartily ashamed of her ignorance. A misplaced
heart and a very ignorant mind, cannot fail of attracting a clever young
he had placed near its summit, to oaks in general, to forests, the

understand each other, or leave you to puzzle out an explanation as
dreadful than a new publication which is shortly to come out, in three
simpleton in general.”
her. Tell her that you think very highly of the understanding of women.”
at all, or an unkind one of me.”
had crossed her during their walk. When the Tilneys were gone, she


in every line, and entreating the immediate presence of her friend on
their dinner in haste, to prevent being in the dark; and then had a

father and mother say? Oh! Heavens! When I think of them I am so
it appeared unspeakably great, and she contemplated it as one of those
“You are so like your dear brother,” continued Isabella, “that I quite
a wink all right for thinking of it. Oh! Catherine, the many sleepless
was herself persuaded, that her father and mother would never oppose
nothing; but we must not expect such disinterestedness in many. As for
would be ecstasy. There are some charming little villas about Richmond.”
Their conference was put an end to by the anxious young lover himself,
Mrs. Thorpe and her son, who were acquainted with everything, and
support her spirits and while away the many tedious hours before
satisfaction. Her heart was overflowing with tenderness. It was “dear
disinterested spirit took no concern. She knew enough to feel secure of
“Shall not you be late at Devizes?” said Catherine. He made no answer;
song.”
good nature, but you have so much, so much of everything; and then you

income of my own; and if she had not a penny, why, so much the better.”
brother’s engagement made her expect to raise no inconsiderable emotion

of the day, she seemed hardly so intimate with her as before; instead
high, and this made it certain. Such insolence of behaviour as Miss
aversion. Let me entreat you never to think of him again, my dear
judgment--”
insist on his keeping his conjecture to himself.”
eyes, his air was more assuming, and his countenance less prepossessing.

the other, and he immediately walked away.
situation, and probable habits of life considered--but, How should I be
consequences; it will involve you in a very cruel embarrassment, and
hands across.
“I cannot take surprise to myself on that head. You bid me be surprised
till all the dancing was over; but then, as they walked about the room
prevail upon me; for, of all things in the world, I hated fine speeches
way.”
unfixed as her ideas of her father’s income, and whose judgment was now
income hardly enough to find one in the common necessaries of life. For
do what they like with their own money.” Catherine was hurt by these
present vexation; and everybody must love you the better for such a

but little interest. In the course of the morning which saw this
“I am very sorry for it,” said Catherine dejectedly; “if I had known
daughter, Miss Morland,” he continued, without leaving his daughter time
by amusement nor splendour, for our mode of living, as you see, is plain
excellent friends in Pulteney Street, and obtained their sanction of
been formed under their eye, and sent therefore by return of post their
be the roof of an abbey! Her passion for ancient edifices was next in
meekly borne. The power of early habit only could account for it. A

Catherine, observing that Isabella’s eyes were continually bent towards

“My sweet love, do not be so abominably affected. What can he write
ignorance.”
“But that you certainly did, for you spent the whole morning in Edgar’s
make him understand what I mean, in the properest way. I would not speak
John desired me to speak to you on the subject, and therefore I have.
that is best known to yourself. A little harmless flirtation or so will
all, you know, might be just as happy without you, for people seldom
could distinguish, “What! Always to be watched, in person or by proxy!”
 (turning her back on him); “I hope your eyes are not tormented now.”
Isabella still sitting with Captain Tilney. With much uneasiness did
thoughtlessness in his sister. She was almost as far from believing as
CHAPTER 19
and smiles, the alteration became too positive to be passed over. What
a gentle remonstrance, to remind Isabella of her situation, and make
“Does he? Then why does he stay here?”
knows what he is about, and must be his own master.”
“I think Mr. Morland would acknowledge a difference. No man is offended
“It is probable that she will neither love so well, nor flirt so


be uneasy,’ because I know that you are so, at this moment; but be as
passion for a month.”
contradiction, and once she drew back her hand; but Catherine remembered
themselves, her quitting them now would not long be felt. Mr. Allen
fears of her seeing nothing to her taste--though never in her life
which confirmed her in fearing that the inquietude of his mind, on
so crowded it with parcels that Miss Morland would not have room to sit;
in which they travelled, of the fashionable chaise and four--postilions
The remembrance of Mr. Allen’s opinion, respecting young men’s open
without parading to her, or swearing at them: so different from the only
“Northanger is not more than half my home; I have an establishment at
“To be sure, I have. Is not it a fine old place, just like what one
But you must be aware that when a young lady is (by whatever means)
“How fearfully will you examine the furniture of your apartment! And

arise, and throwing your dressing-gown around you, proceed to examine
remarkable in either. In one perhaps there may be a dagger, in another
mayst be, into whose hands these memoirs of the wretched Matilda may

smooth, level road of fine gravel, without obstacle, alarm, or solemnity

very distressing.
landing-places, brought them upon a long, wide gallery. On one side it
description of. It was by no means unreasonably large, and contained

a circumstance to raise no common degree of astonishment. If not
thoughts and her eyes were still bent on the object so well calculated
rising shame of having harboured for some minutes an absurd expectation,
on the very instant of their entering, pulled the bell with violence,
fitted up in a style of luxury and expense which was almost lost on the
more comfort in rooms of only half their size. Mr. Allen’s house, he was
for the first time that she was really in an abbey. Yes, these were
fire ready lit, than to have to wait shivering in the cold till all the
this examination, was not without its use; she scorned the causeless
looked closely at the cabinet. It was not absolutely ebony and gold; but
impossible with the consciousness of a cabinet so mysteriously closed
With less alarm and greater eagerness she seized a second, a third, a
knees trembled, and her cheeks grew pale. She seized, with an unsteady
of wind, rising with sudden fury, added fresh horror to the moment.
strange that it should fall to her lot to discover it! Till she had made

of their perusal on her pillow. She now plainly saw that she must not
And the larger sheet, which had enclosed the rest, seemed by its first
Tilney should ever know her folly! And it was in a great measure his
door’s having been at first unlocked, and of being herself its fastener,


The elegance of the breakfast set forced itself on Catherine’s notice
required and would keep him two or three days. They all attended in
is a family living, Miss Morland; and the property in the place being
silence of the lady proved it to be unanswerable.
He was equally at her service. Which did his daughter think would most
general’s side to show her over the abbey? The proposal was his own. And
it; and her feelings of delight were so strong, that without waiting for
tell him in words, that she had never seen any gardens at all equal to
could do the same, for he never entered his, without being vexed in some
his wish to examine the effect of some recent alterations about the
cheerful for him, and he would meet them by another course.” He turned
loved it then, as I have loved it since. At that time indeed I used to
“To be sure you must miss him very much.”

odious to her. She had often read of such characters, characters which
what she so much wished for struck Catherine as very remarkable.
being, contrary to Catherine’s expectations, unprovided with any
no furniture of a more modern date than the fifteenth century. When the
court, which, with occasional passages, not wholly unintricate,
communication to the kitchen--the ancient kitchen of the convent, rich
thought necessary. Catherine could have raved at the hand which had
stopped to curtsy, or some footman in dishabille sneaked off. Yet this
taste could do, to give comfort and elegance to apartments, had been
of gallery, when the general, coming forwards, called her hastily, and,
and what that something was, a short sentence of Miss Tilney’s, as they
suppose?” said she, in a tone of feeling.
Catherine’s blood ran cold with the horrid suggestions which naturally
piece with the strange unseasonableness of his morning walks, and boded
But neither the business alleged, nor the magnificent compliment,

secret means with those cells, might well have favoured the barbarous
various ascending noises convinced her that the servants must still be
eating cold meat at home; and great as was Catherine’s curiosity, her
fearlessly around, nay, that he should even enter the church, seemed
walk, ill-timed as it was in every other view, was favourable here; and
it unwillingly.
apologizing look darted hastily by her, had joined and disappeared
unseen by the general, or that from some consideration of policy she
therefore, in her presence, search for those proofs of the general’s
sound that could alarm a human being. On tiptoe she entered; the room
inclination to open either. Would the veil in which Mrs. Tilney had last
not very definable, she fixed her eyes on the staircase, and in a few
breakfast-parlour to your apartment, as that staircase can be from the
offices in common use?”

of promising! It is a power little worth knowing, however, since it can
boast an interest such as this. The domestic, unpretending merits of a
continued, “the seizure which ended in her death, was sudden. The malady

Remember the country and the age in which we live. Remember that we are

something like affection for her. But now--in short, she made herself as
clearer than that it had been all a voluntary, self-created delusion,
the south of France might be as fruitful in horrors as they were there
the character of their father, who, though cleared from the grossly
chest or a cabinet, for instance--and she did not love the sight of
so particularly strange!
me. I left her and Bath yesterday, never to see either again. I shall
but if ever man had reason to believe himself loved, I was that man. I
entrance. They went to breakfast directly; but Catherine could hardly
After half an hour’s free indulgence of grief and reflection, Catherine

“I have one favour to beg,” said Catherine, shortly afterwards, in an
And yet, when we talked about it in Bath, you little thought of its

and, having expressed also her concern and surprise, began to inquire
at each other. “But,” said Eleanor, after a short pause, “would it be to
guileless, with affections strong but simple, forming no pretensions,
“You think it is all for ambition, then? And, upon my word, there are
irksome; and as for the amusements in which you were wont to share at

consequence and fortune as likely to throw great difficulties in the way
by his children.
and Frederick’s confession of folly need not be forestalled. He must
head, feared the sameness of every day’s society and employments would
no need to fix. You are not to put yourself at all out of your way.
three quarters will carry us to Woodston, I suppose; we shall be in the
must go away directly, two days before I intended it.”

thoughts. That he was very particular in his eating, she had, by her own
to nourish and perfect was the only emotion which could spring from a
and looked with great admiration at every neat house above the rank of

complacency, and Catherine to all her usual ease of spirits.

fresh objects and fresh air, however, was of great use in dissipating
She could not but observe that the abundance of the dinner did not seem

place one can find time for nothing. I have had my pen in my hand to
esteem; but it is very difficult to know whom to trust, and young men
brother! Pray send me some news of the latter--I am quite unhappy about
turban like mine, as I wore it the week before at the concert, but made
again.”
“There is but one thing that I cannot understand. I see that she has



been for a dread of its soon becoming expedient to leave the one, and
obligation of going away very soon. Eleanor looked and declared herself

at Northanger in attendance on the ladies, during his absence in London,
accordingly she hurried down to welcome him.

could only express her concern by silent attention, obliged her to be
compassionately; “it is no one from Woodston. It is my father himself.”
Monday. We are going to Lord Longtown’s, near Hereford, for a fortnight.
Eleanor made no answer; and Catherine’s thoughts recurring to something



Catherine’s swelling heart needed relief. In Eleanor’s presence
earliest fixed on, and of that almost the earliest hour, as if resolved
fact, her fears in probability; and with a mind so occupied in the
be received by her. But the knowledge would have been useless here;
had met there to the same repast, but in circumstances how different!
not have an hour’s comfort. For one letter, at all risks, all hazards, I

as they entered the hall, unable to leave the house without some mention
Catherine was too wretched to be fearful. The journey in itself had no

any strange mischance his father should have gained intelligence of
the general, of course, he would not dare to speak; but to Eleanor--what
pain her family, that would not increase her own grief by the confession
require; and stopping only to change horses, she travelled on for
post-boy drive through the village, amid the gaze of Sunday groups, and
or Harriet could never be exactly understood.
perhaps, at the end of half an hour, be termed, by the courtesy of her
ill will, was a matter which they were at least as far from divining
Catherine is safe at home, and our comfort does not depend upon General
feelings, and of the unusual exertion and fatigue of such a journey,
and never had it been harder for her to write than in addressing Eleanor
you were sadly out of luck too in your Isabella. Ah! Poor James! Well,
with less tenderness than she did at that moment; but he might forget
I dare say he will be a discreeter man all his life, for the foolishness
She was received by the Allens with all the kindness which her
resentment of a sensible friend; and Mrs. Allen thought his expressions

notion you danced with him, but am not quite sure. I remember I had my
earliest friends. There was a great deal of good sense in all this; but

but when a third night’s rest had neither restored her cheerfulness,
are not getting out of humour with home because it is not so grand
Catherine said no more, and, with an endeavour to do right, applied
man whom she had never seen before. With a look of much respect, he
He was not ill-inclined to obey this request, for, though his heart was
home--and being thus without any support, at the end of a quarter of
not on any account prevent her accompanying him. They began their walk,
imagination will at least be all my own.
with which Henry had saved her from the necessity of a conscientious
John Thorpe had first misled him. The general, perceiving his son
moment, by doubling what he chose to think the amount of Mr. Morland’s
to these were added the absolute facts of the Allens being wealthy and
Northanger that they had the smallest idea of the false calculations
proposals, he had, on being brought to the point by the shrewdness of

his father’s views, and being ordered to acquiesce in them, had been
engagement formed almost at the moment to promote the dismissal of
their consent to his marrying their daughter was, for a few minutes,
Their tempers were mild, but their principles were steady, and while
felt and they deplored--but they could not resent it; and they parted,
see in the tell-tale compression of the pages before them, that we are
occasion is very sincere. I know no one more entitled, by unpretending
gentleman whose negligent servant left behind him that collection of
the disposal of its present proprietor, was consequently open to every
knowledge of each other, and adding strength to their attachment,
I
dispositions lead them too much into society for my present situation

Langford.
whatever; I have distinguished no creature besides, of all the numbers
that riches only will not satisfy me. The event of all this is very
given, and I am known to be so intimate with his wife, his slighting me


future period, be obliged to receive her. Mr. Vernon, I think, was a
forward to her arrival. She will have occasion for all those attractive


qualified to make the communication.
Your affectionate brother,

succeeded at last.
unfavourable impression, but where there is a disposition to dislike,
perpetually he is in my thoughts. I found a dismal letter from him on
MRS. VERNON TO MR. DE COURCY
beautiful; but I cannot help feeling that she possesses an uncommon
convinced to the contrary. She speaks of her with so much tenderness and
wish for retirement. But I cannot forget the length of her visit to the

heavy a sacrifice. She is a stupid girl, and has nothing to recommend
importance. I do not mean, therefore, that Fredericas acquirements
could not reconcile it to myself to force Frederica into a marriage from
endeavour to humble the pride of these self important De Courcys still
VIII
though I think you had better not communicate them to my father, whose
and which Reginald himself was entirely disposed to credit. His opinion
actually said that he could not be surprised at any effect produced


and we both laughed heartily at her disappointment; and, in short, were

ungenerous representations of anyone to the disadvantage of another will
be in my power to inflict for her ill-offices could alone enable her
and to make many of those hours pass very pleasantly which would

marriage. I wish you could get Reginald home again on any plausible
not imagine that my brother would be in the smallest danger of being

happiness, that of your parents, and the credit of your name. I do not
To our family she has always been represented in softened colours by
and may naturally seek an alliance which must be advantageous to
intelligence; you had no doubt of its authenticity a month ago. If

write to Reginald myself as soon as my eyes would let me, to point out,
well of Lady Susan, that his assurances as to marriage, &c., do not set
XIV
possible. To impute such a design to Lady Susan would be taking from her
have been attributed to selfishness in Lady Susan; but in this case, as

she did receive serious proposals from Sir James, but her removing to
than she has yet done of her mothers tender care. I have now, my dear
XV
it may be true, but his intelligence must come from herself, and I
her mother insinuates, I am afraid she is a perverse girl. She has
Frederica should be allowed to come to Churchhill, and justly enough, as

Churchhill.
any cause for her extraordinary conduct, which confirms me in my own
he has ascertained the beginning and end of everything. This is one sort
Yours ever, S. VERNON.
My dear Mother,--Mr. Vernon returned on Thursday night, bringing his
who occasionally caught her observing his countenance with exultation,
Her mother has insinuated that her temper is intractable, but I never
day there, practising as it is called; but I seldom hear any noise when
she was detected in this scheme, I cannot so readily credit what Lady


affection detach him from her mother, we might bless the day which
are all very fond of her.

it was achieved at the tender age of sixteen, we shall have room for

am unalterably fixed on this point, though I have not yet quite decided

explanation; I begged her to tell me what she meant. At that moment we
we entered the room, that I felt for her exceedingly. Lady Susan behaved
her thither accordingly, and as soon as the door was closed, she said:
with Sir James as not very distant, I had intended within a few days to
daughter; and then said: "I am not apt to deal in professions, my
he does not know what to make of the matter. When Sir James came, he
slight her, a better fate than to be Sir James Martins wife. As soon

be half distracted, for I cannot bear him. No human being but YOU could

and must relieve myself by writing to you, who I know will enter into
them both in my eyes, I felt by no means assured that such might not be
though my impertinent sister, I believe, wanted only opportunity for
daughter had acquainted him with some circumstances concerning herself,
credulity. How dared he believe what she told him in my disfavour! Ought
heard him go on leaving mine. How unpleasant, one would think, must be
XXIII
delight that I can scarcely hold a pen; but am determined to send you
unhappy by that Martin. He wants to marry her; her mother promotes the
after my return to the parlour Lady Susan entered the room. I concluded,
delight will be yours in seeing him again; in seeing him still worthy
XXIV
are all as we were before. One point only is gained. Sir James Martin is
this?" She blushed deeply as she answered: "I was so unhappy about Sir
you. Do you think that your uncle or I should not have espoused your
own room." "No, Catherine," he replied, "I am not going. Will you let

violently against marrying Sir James." "And can your ladyship wonder
forward." "Say rather that she has been unfortunate in her education!"
me destitute of every honest, every natural feeling? Am I capable of
not question me, however, my dear sister, too minutely on this point,"
now find it. I have a real regard for him, and was beyond expression
now be easy. Excuse me, my dearest sister, for thus trespassing on your
He thinks very differently of her from what he used to do; he does her

peace than I ever intended to submit to--a spirit, too, resulting from
convince him that I was not quite happy. "I beg your pardon, sir, for
with perfect convenience, be hastened; and I make it my particular
have left me in the first angry swelling of his proud heart without
my determination as to the rest, I shall probably put THAT project
fact, I have not; for though he is still in my power, I have given up

Churchhill, with the Vernons. But you are fitted for society, and it
leaves London next Tuesday; he is going for his health to Bath, where,
great that, though Mr. Johnson was her guardian, and I do not in general

her mothers friends; but with those friends she must have mixed (a very
undetermined, there was something in his look and voice as he spoke

for Bath, nothing could induce him to have a gouty symptom.

me detest Mr. Johnson, but now the extent of my aversion is not to
doubtful at times as to marrying; if the old man would die I might not

power, nor accuse me of instability without first hearing my reasons.
sometimes quarrelling with myself for suffering you to form a connection
affairs have taken a more favourable turn. To assist us in such a
I cannot bear reproaches: my spirits are not so high as to need being

again there might be confusion, for it is impossible to be sure of
XXXII
drawing-room for me. She arrived yesterday in pursuit of her husband,



conviction of the imposition I have been under, and the absolute
XXXV
to my discredit? What can you now have heard to stagger your esteem for

reached me, in common with the world in general, and gained my entire
her reason, how is SHE to be consoled! After such a discovery as this,
LADY SUSAN TO MR. DE COURCY

De Courcy; he has just informed Mr. Johnson of it by letter. He leaves
that one cannot help loving him at first sight. Mr. Johnson and he

were we at liberty, I doubt if I could resist even matrimony offered by

knowing of Reginalds being gone to London, for he is returned. Reginald
soon will) we will try to rob him of his heart once more, and I am full

I asked her whether she had seen my brother since his arrival in town;
believes that Frederica will now be treated with affection. I wish I

Having learnt enough, in the meanwhile, from her open-hearted brother,
and sister her sense of their kindness, and her pleasure in their
she must confess herself to have sometimes an anxious doubt of Londons

detesting the sex, might be reasonably looked for in the course of a
Persuasion
one; there his faculties were roused into admiration and respect, by

motto:--"Principal seat, Kellynch Hall, in the county of Somerset," and

sensible, deserving woman, who had been brought, by strong attachment
discontented when a woman does marry again, than when she does not; but
weight, her convenience was always to give way--she was only Anne.
given all the honour and received none: Elizabeth would, one day or

handsome as ever, but she felt her approach to the years of danger, and

following spring he was seen again in town, found equally agreeable,
ceased.
slightingly and contemptuously of the very blood he belonged to, and
Shepherd, his agent, from his thoughts.  The Kellynch property was
these two branches of economy, to cut off some unnecessary charities,
power, but he would never condescend to sell.  No; he would never

for the credit of the family, as aristocratic in her ideas of what was

regulations, in seven years he will be clear; and I hope we may be able
proceeding, his friends to be urging him.  She considered it as an act
with, were not to be borne. "What! every comfort of life knocked off!
himself; and would be looked up to, as regulating the modes of life in

his own neighbourhood.  Anne herself would have found the
be more known.
being dropped of his having such an intention; and it was only on the
Russell, who thought it a friendship quite out of place, could hint of
Clay; turning from the society of so deserving a sister, to bestow her
"I must take leave to observe, Sir Walter," said Mr Shepherd one
"I presume to observe, Sir Walter, that, in the way of business,
abroad; in the supposition of which, as I was going to observe, since
Kellynch: "but I quite agree with my father in thinking a sailor might
but what restrictions I might impose on the use of the

"Indeed!" was the reply, and with a look of surprise.
deplorable-looking personage you can imagine; his face the colour of
"Nay, Sir Walter," cried Mrs Clay, "this is being severe indeed.  Have
are not obliged to follow any, who can live in a regular way, in the
to settle in his own country, and had come down to Taunton in order to
Mr Shepherd answered for his being of a gentlemans family, and
comfortable home, and to get into it as soon as possible; knew he must
she was at Taunton with the admiral, and had been present almost all
But Mrs Clay was talking so eagerly with Miss Elliot, that she did not


treaty, and authorising him to wait on Admiral Croft, who still
Nothing could be done without a reference to Elizabeth: but her

declarations and proposals, or he in having them accepted.
profession, would be, indeed, a throwing away, which she grieved to
enough for Anne; but Lady Russell saw it very differently.  His
not a merely selfish caution, under which she acted, in putting an end

was the eldest son of a man, whose landed property and general
alluded to; but Anne, at seven-and-twenty, thought very differently
confidence had been justified.  His genius and ardour had seemed to

over the conviction which had always been most grateful to her, of the
and the Crofts, which, with Lady Russell, still resident in Kellynch,
This meeting of the two parties proved highly satisfactory, and decided
Sir Walter, without hesitation, declared the Admiral to be the
use, or any importance, in the choice of the house which they were
the matter, was indisposed; and foreseeing that she should not have a
This invitation of Marys removed all Lady Russells difficulties, and
Anne herself was become hardened to such affronts; but she felt the
herself, should never, she thought, have reason to reproach her for
anything in the world, I am sure, would induce my father to make a
manner may set off handsome features, but can never alter plain ones.

mansion of the squire, with its high walls, great gates, and old trees,
a matter of course. Though better endowed than the elder sister, Mary
morning!"
out long; but he has never come back, and now it is almost one.  I
window, but without getting off his horse; and though I told him how
must be aware that my wish would be to remain with Lady Russell to the
of a more trying nature: going to almost every house in the parish, as
party."
then she was well enough to propose a little walk.
Anne had always thought such a style of intercourse highly imprudent;
perhaps of improvement.  The father and mother were in the old English
elegant and cultivated mind for all their enjoyments; and envied them

the separate but very similar remark of Mr and Mrs Musgrove: "So, Miss
occupied in all the other common subjects of housekeeping, neighbours,
interest, amusement, and wholesome exertion.
had sometimes more share than she wished, being appealed to by both

humours and indulges them to such a degree, and gives them so much
only keep in tolerable order by more cake than is good for them."
strange stories of her; she is always upon the gad; and from my own
are about it; but I wish anybody could give Mary a hint that it would
own spirits improved by change of place and subject, by being removed
aware.  She knew that when she played she was giving pleasure only to

precious rooms and furniture, groves, and prospects, beginning to own
see the Crofts, and was glad to be within when the visit was returned.
of herself, and no doubts of what to do; without any approach to

know him by name."
youngest Miss Musgrove walked in.  That she was coming to apologize,
unluckily it came into mammas head, when they were gone, that
of, and scarcely at all regretted, when the intelligence of his death
during the whole of his absence; that is to say, the only two
affected her spirits exceedingly, and thrown her into greater grief for
teach herself to be insensible on such points.  And not only did it

were actually setting forward for the Great House, where, as she
other house, which brought her an accession rather of frightened,
him, how much handsomer, how infinitely more agreeable they thought him
enquiries; and Mr Musgrove, no longer under the first uneasiness about
should happen?"
"Nothing can be going on better than the child," said he; "so I told my
disagreeable going on men are always sure to get out of it, and Charles
directions, and have no fears; and indeed, Mary, I cannot wonder at
careful; and she could send us word every hour how he was.  I really
at a word.  It will be a great deal better than leaving him only with
"I mean to go with you, Charles, for I am of no more use at home than
when the child might be at rest for the night, and kindly urged her to
ago, when events had been early giving him the independence which alone
Anne understood it.  He wished to avoid seeing her.  He had inquired
his running on to give notice.


went away, and he said, You were so altered he should not have known


"Yes, here I am, Sophia, quite ready to make a foolish match.  Anybody
most men."
each; they could not but be reverted to; the year of their engagement
drawing-room at Uppercross, they would have found it most difficult to
and arrangement which was practicable, drew from him some pleasant


seriously.  "I was as well satisfied with my appointment as you can
at last, on some very wet day, is lent to yourself.  Ah! she was a dear
Musgroves could be as open as they were sincere, in their exclamations
hear him talked of by such a good friend."
wanted money:  worse than myself.  He had a wife.  Excellent fellow.  I

her, in a low voice, about her son, doing it with so much sympathy and
proportions.  A large bulky figure has as good a right to be in deep
"Should I?  I am glad I was not a week later then."

three children, round from Portsmouth to Plymouth.  Where was this
port or another, after our husbands, if everybody had your feelings?"
"Ay, that we shall."
being in different places about home: Cork, and Lisbon, and Gibraltar.
excellent health, and no climate disagrees with me.  A little
over, and he is safe back again."
made it credible that they were not decided rivals.  If he were a
down to try to make out an air which he wished to give the Miss

Croft were generally out of doors together, interesting themselves in
neighbourhood, where residence was not required, lived at his fathers
very superior in cultivation and manners to all the rest.
perhaps the prettiest, Louisa had the higher spirits; and she knew not
extremely delightful.
creation, however, and I never think much of your new creations."
Musgrove of Uppercross."
is the only one that could be possible; but he is a very good-natured,
liking Louisa as well as Henrietta, it is nonsense to say so; for he
happiness of either sister, or impeaching his own honour, than that he
only two Sundays, and when they parted, had left her interested, even
listen at all to his account of a conversation which he had just held


his attempts by seating himself near the table, and taking up the
again directly.
that Captain Wentworth had done it.
for none of it.  It was evident that Charles Hayter was not well

did not attribute guile to any.  It was the highest satisfaction to her
seeing him to-morrow.  Anne could only feel that Charles Hayter was
they did not wish, and admired again the sort of necessity which the
Just as they were setting off, the gentlemen returned.  They had taken
herself some few of the thousand poetical descriptions extant of


ploughs at work, and the fresh made path spoke the farmer counteracting
wished; but "No!" said Charles Musgrove, and "No, no!" cried Louisa
it was settled between Charles and his two sisters, that he and
The brow of the hill, where they remained, was a cheerful spot: Louisa
Anne, really tired herself, was glad to sit down; and she very soon

infuse as much of your own spirit into her as you can.  But this, no

After a moments pause, Captain Wentworth said--


were thus divided, forming three distinct parties; and to that party of
it was to cross, and when the party had all reached the gate of exit,
to his sister.  The something might be guessed by its effects.
placed her there, that his will and his hands had done it, that she
Her answers to the kindness and the remarks of her companions were at
pleasantly; "for if Miss Elliot were to hear how soon we came to an
people.  My dear Admiral, that post!  we shall certainly take that
The time now approached for Lady Russells return:  the day was even
She wished it might be possible for her to avoid ever seeing Captain
she had not at all imagined.  Captain Wentworth, after being unseen and
was the consequence.
middle of November would not leave much time for seeing a new place,
down to the sea.  They were come too late in the year for any amusement
happiest spot for watching the flow of the tide, for sitting in
proceeded towards the Cobb, equally their object in itself and on
an officer, whom he had always valued highly, which must have stamped
Harvilles seemed, if possible, augmented by the event which closed all
They all met, and were introduced.  Captain Harville was a tall, dark
already ordered at the inn, was at last, though unwillingly, accepted
could think capable of accommodating so many.  Anne had a moments

protesting that she was convinced of sailors having more worth and

and gentleness of her manners, soon had their effect; and Anne was well
intimately acquainted with all the tenderest songs of the one poet, and
particularize, mentioned such works of our best moralists, such
serious reflection, that, like many other great moralists and
silent; till Henrietta suddenly began again with--
quite melancholy to have such excellent people as Dr and Mrs Shirley,
Anne smiled more than once to herself during this speech, and entered
of her, because she is so very clever; but I respect her amazingly, and
gentleman, at the same moment preparing to come down, politely drew
little longer, they returned to the inn; and Anne, in passing
the first they had heard since entering Lyme) drew half the party to
far up the hill as they could, they returned to the breakfast table.
"Bless me!" cried Mary; "it must be our cousin; it must be our Mr
I wish I had looked at him more.  I wish we had been aware in time, who
her that their father and Mr Elliot had not, for many years, been on
next time you write to Bath.  I think my father certainly ought to hear
Uppercross by one, and in the meanwhile were to be all together, and
but what can we do?  We cannot part."
not I.  I would as soon have been run up to the yard-arm.  Nobody could
Mrs Harvilles giving it as her opinion that her husband would have
blue seas" could not fail of being brought forward by their present
was too precipitate by half a second, she fell on the pavement on the
Captain Wentworth, in a tone of despair, and as if all his own strength
"A surgeon!" said Anne.
of the three, who were completely rational, was suffering most: Captain

consigned, for, though partially revived, she was quite helpless; and
Louisa, under Mrs Harvilles direction, was conveyed up stairs, and

It now became necessary for the party to consider what was best to be
Harville was a very experienced nurse, and her nursery-maid, who had

was anxious to be at home.
appeared.
better for him to take a chaise from the inn, and leave Mr Musgroves



"Dont talk of it, dont talk of it," he cried.  "Oh God! that I had
before.  It was growing quite dusk, however, before they were in the
deference for her judgement, a great pleasure; and when it became a

"She really left nothing for Mary to do.  He and Mary had been
brothers, was now living in her deserted nursery to mend stockings and
"What should they do without her?  They were wretched comforters for
She was the last, excepting the little boys at the cottage, she was the
objects ever to be discerned from the windows, was enough to make the
being possible for her to go to the Hall she had contrived to evade and
Kellynch, and which she had felt slighted, and been compelled to
There was a little awkwardness at first in their discourse on another
the value of an Anne Elliot, should, eight years afterwards, be charmed
"I think you are very likely to suffer the most of the two; your
In such moments Anne had no power of saying to herself, "These rooms
the accident), had brought Anne the last note, which she had not been
would still remain to suffer from the concussion hereafter!  The
if you like it."
"We have made very few changes either," continued the Admiral, after
hand, and we soon shifted their quarters; and now I am quite snug, with
like better than this.  Pray say so, with my compliments.  He will be

holidays, had hardly a hope of being allowed to bring her with them.
whose daughter she was, and there had been so much going on every day,
shooting, and he seemed quite delighted, and, for my part, I thought it
But Mary did not give into it very graciously, whether from not
your recommendation, and he wants to talk to you about them; he has

my acquaintance, for I have been seeing him every day this last

to call here.  And when he does, Mary, you may depend upon hearing my

hear the door-bell without feeling that it might be his herald; nor
Lady Russell and Anne paid their compliments to them once, when Anne
paying his respects to Lady Russell, and sat down close to her for ten
went to school again.  The Harvilles had promised to come with her and
pattens, she made no complaint.  No, these were noises which belonged
interest.  Mr Elliot was in Bath.  He had called in Camden Place; had

you again?"  A degree of unexpected cordiality, however, in the welcome
was all Bath.
regret in the duties and dignity of the resident landholder, should
fortnight in Bath, and his first object on arriving, had been to leave
unfeudal tone of the present day.  He was astonished, indeed, but his

in general; delighted, in short, by every proof of cousinly notice, and
to him?  She could only offer one solution; it was, perhaps, for
Anne mentioned the glimpses she had had of him at Lyme, but without

five-and-thirty frights; and once, as he had stood in a shop on Bond
was not sandy-haired.
ten oclock.  Could it be Mr Elliot?  They knew he was to dine in
no occasion for remembering Mary); and Anne, smiling and blushing, very
There could be no doubt of his being a sensible man.  Ten minutes were
were!  The name of Musgrove would have told him enough.  "Well, it
His enquiries, however, produced at length an account of the scene she
Camden Place could have passed so well!
for Elizabeth was replying in a sort of whisper, "That must not be any
In the course of the same morning, Anne and her father chancing to be
The evil of a marriage would be much diminished, if Elizabeth were also
almost ready to exclaim, "Can this be Mr Elliot?" and could not
soon to suspect) to prevent his thinking of a second choice.  Her
this cautious reply:--"Elizabeth! very well; time will explain."
However it might end, he was without any question their pleasantest
Miss Carteret; and all the comfort of No. --, Camden Place, was swept
case arose from there having been a suspension of all intercourse by
heard her spoken of as a charming woman.  It was very desirable that

their value.  Anne smiled and said,
those good ladies in Laura Place, and enjoy all the advantages of the
"Pardon me, dear cousin, you are unjust in your own claims.  In London,
speaking lower, though there was no one else in the room) "in one

want of near relations and a settled home, remaining another year at
now in lodgings near the hot baths, living in a very humble way, unable
parted, and each presented a somewhat different person from what the
past--and she had lived very much in the world--nor the restrictions of
of all this, Anne had reason to believe that she had moments only of
state on first reaching Bath.  Then she had, indeed, been a pitiable
admirably, has really proved an invaluable acquaintance.  As soon as I
world, know nothing worth attending to.  Call it gossip, if you will,
disinterested, self-denying attachment, of heroism, fortitude,
ought, and the wife had been led among that part of mankind which made
to speak of her. Sir Walter, Elizabeth and Mrs Clay, returned one
who was her husband?  One of five thousand Mr Smiths whose names are to
Elizabeth.
Ireland!  Mrs Smith!  Such a name!"
been at the trouble of inviting both Lady Russell and Mr Elliot; and Mr

I only mean that if Mr Elliot should some time hence pay his addresses
might be allowed to fancy you such as she was, in situation and name,
did not believe.  The same image of Mr Elliot speaking for himself
allusions to former practices and pursuits, suggested suspicions not
and enthusiasm did captivate her still.  She felt that she could so
feeling than the hope of seeing him receive the hand of her beloved
her; and, to quicken the pleasure and surprise, with Admiral and Mrs
Anne could listen no longer; she could not even have told how the poor
but you will be surprised to hear they have never gone home.  Mrs
convenient to me to dine there to-morrow.  I am glad you find Mr Elliot

In the first place, I had a note from Mrs Croft yesterday, offering to
my honour!  Are not you astonished?  I shall be surprised at least if
Musgrove, but a million times better than marrying among the Hayters."

"Oh, no! I think not.  Situated as we are with Lady Dalrymple, cousins,
had given Louisa up, had ceased to love, had found he did not love her.
avoid suspecting before; and instead of drawing the same conclusion as
amusing, but she had no doubt of its being so.  The day at Lyme, the
She longed to see the Crofts; but when the meeting took place, it was
with him in everything, and to walk for her life to do him good.  Anne
her friends carriage, in the lower part of the town, and return alone
mountains, as if they were not to be upset the next moment, which they

do you like Bath, Miss Elliot?  It suits us very well.  We are always
Croft, she must let him have his own way.  As soon as they were fairly
Louisa, we all thought, you know, was to marry Frederick.  He was
"Well, she is to marry him.  Nay, most likely they are married already,
pleasing, and I will answer for it, they would generally please."
have it from Frederick himself.  His sister had a letter from him

nature in the letter.  He does not give the least fling at Benwick;
sure.  It would be of no use to go to Uppercross again, for that other
Milsom Street.  It began to rain, not much, but enough to make shelter
was a mere trifle, and Anne was most sincere in preferring a walk with

entrance of Captain Wentworth himself, among a party of gentlemen and
After a short interval, however, he came towards her, and spoke again.
him, that there was complete internal recognition on each side; she was
"I am much obliged to you," was her answer, "but I am not going with
conviction, that the rain would come to nothing at present, and adding,

her more than her sister."
whether he were really suffering much from disappointment or not; and
was to marry Captain Benwick.  It had cost her something to encounter
when the moment approached which must point him out, though not daring
Frankland were telling me of last night.  They described the
stupidity of private parties, in which they were getting more and more
the more decided promise of a longer visit on the morrow.  Mrs Smith

nothing of their looks, and felt equal to everything which she believed
no hurry to leave her; and presently with renewed spirit, with a little
you could have little idea of his being eventually one of those most

untaught feeling on his side, and this surprises me.  A man like him,
smallest wish for a total change, she only deviated so far as to say--
involved in, the stretch of mind, the wear of spirits!  I should have
appeared for whom they were waiting.  "Lady Dalrymple, Lady Dalrymple,"
kind to all, and to pity every one, as being less happy than herself.
as they could.
manner and look, had been such as she could see in only one light.  His
were all properly arranged, she looked round to see if he should happen
during the first act.  Towards the close of it, in the interval
"I will not oppose such kind politeness; but I should be sorry to be
"Indeed!  How so?  You can have been acquainted with it only since I
"No, no, some time or other, perhaps, but not now.  He would mention no
Such, she believed, were his words; but scarcely had she received their
right direction, and distinguished Captain Wentworth standing among a
The first act was over.  Now she hoped for some beneficial change; and,
chiefly wore the prospect of an hour of agitation.  She could not quit
concert closed.
improved, and he replied again with almost a smile.  They talked for a
"Is not this song worth staying for?" said Anne, suddenly struck by an

sentiments, by his early prepossession.  It was altogether very
expected her, though it had been an appointment.
fed.  They never miss a concert."
"No, that was what I dreaded.  It would have been very unpleasant to me
pleasant evening.  I see it in your eye.  I perfectly see how the hours
me this morning.  It is really very good of you to come and sit with

be of even the slightest use to you," replied Anne; "but I suspect that

Where can you look for a more suitable match?  Where could you expect a
natural, perhaps.  Ninety-nine out of a hundred would do the same.  Of
enough.  And, upon my word, he is nothing to me.  Should he ever

in particular."
use to you in any way that I could.  Shall I mention to him your being

tone of cordiality, "I beg your pardon for the short answers I have
that could be perpetrated without risk of his general character.  He
excessively pleased with Mr Elliot, and entertained the highest opinion
been about the same time that he became known to my father and sister.
in society, indeed, rendered that impossible, yet I knew her all her
decide), that your father and sister, in their civilities and
and vouch for your being a very different creature from--"
only with the young, and we were a thoughtless, gay set, without any
of her fortune, before he committed himself.  Depend upon it, whatever
different now."
careless and immethodical, like other men, about those things; and when
it.  At present, believe me, I have no need of your services, being in
Smith, observing the high colour in her face, said--
"Thank you.  This is full proof undoubtedly; proof of every thing you
"Colonel Wallis! you are acquainted with him?"

credit due, by listening to some particulars which you can yourself
moment, I have no doubt, had a double motive in his visits there.  But

is now a confirmed feeling.  He cannot bear the idea of not being Sir
opportunity of being with them, threw himself in their way, called at

attending the next Lady Elliot, through Mrs Walliss recommendation?"
unfeeling in his conduct towards her; very deficient both in justice
pleasure and vanity which could be commanded without involving himself,
and the difficulties and distress which this refusal had heaped on her,
comprehend the exquisite relief, and was only the more inclined to
To feel that she ought to be in better circumstances, that a little
comfort of telling the whole story her own way.
hope that you must fare better."

mortifications which must be hanging over her father and sister, and
She found, on reaching home, that she had, as she intended, escaped
excessively he was regretting that he should miss my father this
and sinking all the rest of her astonishment in a convenient silence.

been gradually led along.  She was accordingly more guarded, and more
greater part of two days.  He was invited again to Camden Place the
obliging purpose of saving her sister trouble, which determined her to
"And mine," added Sir Walter.  "Kindest regards.  And you may say, that
was really glad to see them; and the others were not so sorry but that
Captain Harville, beside their two selves.  He gave her a very plain,
in it by way of general convenience.  They had arrived late the night
was," Charles added:  "only five-and-twenty miles from Uppercross, and
"Oh! yes.  My father would be well pleased if the gentlemen were
such hands!  Your father and mother seem so totally free from all those
"To be sure he is.  Nobody doubts it; and I hope you do not think I am
blessings if she could, but she did not want to lessen theirs.
servants, which a dinner must betray, witnessed by those who had been
She was particularly asked to meet Mr Elliot, and be introduced to Lady
Anne had the kindest welcome from each.  Henrietta was exactly in that
convince her that she was not ill-used by anybody; which Mary, well
feared from his looks, that the same unfortunate persuasion, which had
standing under the colonnade, and a gentleman with her.  I saw them
still more positively that it was Mr Elliot, calling again upon Anne to
really was Mr Elliot, which she had never believed, before he
have been to the theatre, and secured a box for to-morrow night.  Ant
so forgetful?"
connexion between the Dalrymples and ourselves.  Nothing ever happened
Charles and Mary still talked on in the same style; he, half serious

station, with less bare-faced design, by Anne.

heard; other visitors approached, and the door was thrown open for Sir
friends:  no formal party." It was all said very gracefully, and the
gratification, of polite acknowledgement rather than acceptance.  She
proceeded on their own business, and they met no more while Anne
gnawing solicitude never appeased for five minutes together.  She
his lectures and restrictions on her designs on Sir Walter.  She

unfavourable, and she had grieved over the rain on her friends
Wentworth said--
had said one day, and what Mr Musgrove had proposed the next, and what
as bad; and so we thought they had better marry at once, and make the

practice as had fallen within their observation, but Anne heard nothing
Harvilles countenance re-assumed the serious, thoughtful expression
who else was there to employ?  I hope I can allow for him.  I am not
do not forget you as soon as you forget us.  It is, perhaps, our fate
circumstances, it must be from within; it must be nature, mans nature,
difficulties, and privations, and dangers enough to struggle with.  You
"Have you finished your letter?" said Captain Harville.

respect saying what should not be said."
existence!  I speak, you know, only of such men as have hearts!"

Frederick had a card too, though I did not see it; and you are
Captain Harville, but from him not a word, nor a look!  He had passed
While supposed to be writing only to Captain Benwick, he had been also
not say that man forgets sooner than  woman, that his love has an
decide whether I enter your fathers house this evening or never."
very ill, were shocked and concerned, and would not stir without her
and Mrs Musgrove, who thought only of one sort of illness, having
"Oh! my dear, it is quite understood, I give you my word.  Captain
Even if he did not come to Camden Place himself, it would be in her
thought, Charles said--
like the second size double-barrel of mine, which you shot with one day
again into the past, more exquisitely happy, perhaps, in their
hour of first meeting her in Bath; that had returned, after a short
and believed it to be done.  He had imagined himself indifferent, when
it, he had not understood the perfect excellence of the mind with which
"I found," said he, "that I was considered by Harville an engaged man!
all, he must regard himself as bound to her, if her sentiments for him
youth; but the value of such homage was inexpressibly increased to
were single.  It was possible that you might retain the feelings of the
well-wishers; to see your cousin close by you, conversing and smiling,
I thought it was to duty, but no duty could be called in aid here.  In
have spared you much or all of this."
enjoyment.
intercourse of brother and sister; with Lady Russell, attempts at
however.  I am not saying that she did not err in her advice.  It was,
to being in charity with her soon.  But I too have been thinking over
myself.  Six years of separation and suffering might have been spared.
carry their point, be they ever so poor, or ever so imprudent, or ever
Providence had placed him, and who could give his daughter at present
serious anxiety was Lady Russell.  Anne knew that Lady Russell must be

sister must be better than her husbands sisters, it was very agreeable

affections; and it is now a doubtful point whether his cunning, or
having no relations to bestow on him which a man of sense could value.

bid defiance even to greater accessions of worldly prosperity.  She

